1
Sophie’s World
A Novel about the History of Philosophy
Jostien Gaarder
Translated by Paulette Miller
More praise for the international bestseller that has become:
“Europe’s oddball literary sensation of the decade”—New York
Newsday
“A page-turner.” —Entertainment Weekly
“First, think of a beginner’s guide to philosophy, written by a
schoolteacher ... Next, imagine a fantasy novel— something like a
modern-day version of Through the Looking Glass. Meld these
disparate genres, and what do you get? Well, what you get is an
improbable international bestseller ... a runaway hit... [a] tour de
force.”—Time
“Compelling.” —Los Angeles Times
“Its depth of learning, its intelligence and its totally original
conception give it enormousmagnetic appeal ... To be fully human,
and to feel our continuity with 3,000 years of philosophical
inquiry, we need to put ourselves in Sophie’s world.” —Boston
Sunday Globe
“Involving and often humorous.” —USA Today
“In the adroit hands of Jostein Gaarder, the whole sweep of
three millennia of Western philosophy is rendered as lively as a
gossip column ... Literary sorcery of the first rank.” —Fort Worth
Star-Telegram
“A comprehensive history of Western philosophy as
recounted to a 14-year-old Norwegian schoolgirl... The book will
serve as a first-rate introduction to anyone who never took an
introductory philosophy course, and as a pleasant refresher for
those who have and have forgotten most ofit... [Sophie’s mother]
is a marvelous comic foil.”—Newsweek
“Terrifically entertaining and imaginative ... I’ll read
Sophie’s World again.” —DailyMail
“What is admirable in the novel is the utter unpretentiousness of the philosophical lessons, the plain and workmanlike
prose which manages to deliver Western philosophy in accounts
that arecrystal clear. It is heartening to know that a booksubtitled
“’A Novel about the History of Philosophy’ was not only a
bestseller in France, but for a while Europe’s hottest novel.”—
2
The Washington Post Book World
“A rare bird indeed, a short history of Western
philosophical thought from Socrates to Sartre, coyly embedded
in the wrapping of a suspense novel.” —New York Newsday
“A simply wonderful, irresistible book ... a cross between
Bertrand Russell’s History of Western Philosophy and Alice in
Wonderland.” —The Daily Telegraph
“An exciting trek into, the realm of thought, from the
ancient philosophers’ school of Athens to the Konigsberg of
Kant... and a brilliant success.” -Der Spiegel
“Intelligently written... an enchanting way to learn
philosophy.” —Baton Rouge Magazine
“Just as remarkable for its playful premise as it is for its
accessibility ... The essential charmof Sophie’s World lies in the
innocent curiosity of the young character, and the clever
narrative structure Gaarder designed to pique it.”—Columbus
Dispatch
“An extraordinary writer.” —Madeleine L’Engle
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, Inc., edition published 1994
Berkley edition / March 1996 All rights reserved.
Originally published in Norwegian under the title Sofies
verden, copyright © 1991 by H. Aschehoug & Co. (W.
Nygaard), Oslo. Translation © 1994 by Paulette Moller.
Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible without the
support and encouragement of Siri Dannevig. Thanks are also
due to Maiken Ims for reading the manuscript and making
useful comments, and to Trond Berg Eriksen for his
trenchant observations and knowledgeable support through
the years. J.G.
He who cannot draw on three thousand years
Is living from hand to mouth
GOETHE
3
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
At some point something must have come from nothing.
Sophie Amundsen was on her way home from school. She had
walked the first part of the way with Joanna. They had been
discussing robots. Joanna thought the human brain was like an
advanced computer. Sophie was not certain she agreed. Surely a
person was more than a piece of hardware?
When they got to the supermarket they went their separate
ways. Sophie lived on the outskirts of a sprawling suburb and had
almost twice as far to school as Joanna. There were no other houses
beyond her garden, which made it seem as if her house lay at the end
of the world. This was where the woods began.
She turned the corner into Clover Close. At the end of the road
there was a sharp bend, known as Captain’s Bend. People seldom
went that way except on the weekend.
It was early May. In some of the gardens the fruit trees were
encircled with dense clusters of daffodils. The birches were already
in pale green leaf.
It was extraordinary how everything burst forth at this time of
year! What made this great mass of green vegetation come welling
up from the dead earth as soon as it got warm and the last traces of
snow disappeared?
As Sophie opened her garden gate, she looked in the mailbox.
There was usually a lot of junk mail and a few big envelopes for her
mother, a pile to dump on the kitchen table before she went up to
her room to start her homework.
From time to time there would be a few letters from the bank
for her father, but then he was not a normal father. Sophie’s father
was the captain of a big oil tanker, and was away for most of the
year.
During the few weeks at a time when he was at home, he would
shuffle around the house making it nice and cozy for Sophie and her
mother. But when he was at sea he could seem very distant.
There was only one letter in the mailbox—and it was for 
4
Sophie. The white envelope read: “Sophie Amundsen, 3 Clover
Close.” That was all; it did not say who it was from. There was no
stamp on it either.
As soon as Sophie had closed the gate behind her she opened
the envelope. It contained only a slip of paper no bigger than the
envelope. It read: Who are you?
Nothing else, only the three words, written by hand, and
followed by a large question mark.
She looked at the envelope again. The letter was definitely for
her. Who could have dropped it in the mailbox?
Sophie let herself quickly into the red house. As always, her cat
Sherekan managed to slink out of the bushes, jump onto the front
step, and slip in through the door before she closed it behind her.
Whenever Sophie’s mother was in a bad mood, she would call
the house they lived in a menagerie. A menagerie was a collection
of animals. Sophie certainly had one and was quite happy with it. It
had begun with the three goldfish, Goldtop, Red Ridinghood, and
Black Jack. Next she got two budgerigars called Smitt and Smule,
then Govinda the tortoise, and finally the marmalade cat Sherekan.
They had all been given to her to make up for the fact that her mother
never got home from work until late in the afternoon and her father
was away so much, sailing all over the world.
Sophie slung her schoolbag on the floor and put a bowl of cat
food out for Sherekan. Then she sat down on a kitchen stool with
the mysterious letter in her hand.
Who are you?
She had no idea. She was Sophie Amundsen, of course, but who
was that? She had not really figured that out—yet.
What if she had been given a different name? Anne Knutsen,
for instance. Would she then have been someone else?
She suddenly remembered that Dad had originally wanted her
to be called Lillemor. Sophie tried to imagine herself shaking hands
and introducing herself as Lillemor Amundsen, but it seemed all
wrong. It was someone else who kept introducing herself.
She jumped up and went into the bathroom with the strange
letter in her hand. She stood in front of the mirror and stared into her 
5
own eyes.
“I am Sophie Amundsen,” she said.
The girl in the mirror did not react with as much as a twitch.
Whatever Sophie did, she did exactly the same. Sophie tried to beat
her reflection to it with a lightning movement but the other girl was
just as fast.
“Who are you?” Sophie asked.
She received no response to this either, but felt a momentary
confusion as to whether it was she or her reflection who had asked
the question.
Sophie pressed her index finger to the nose in the mirror and
said, “You are me.” As she got no answer to this, she turned the
sentence around and said, “I am you.”
Sophie Amundsen was often dissatisfied with her appearance.
She was frequently told that she had beautiful almond-shaped eyes,
but that was probably just something people said because her nose
was too small and her mouth was a bit too big. And her ears were
much too close to her eyes. Worst of all was her straight hair, which
it was impossible to do anything with. Sometimes her father would
stroke her hair and call her “the girl with the flaxen hair,” after a
piece of music by Claude Debussy. It was all right for him, he was
not condemned to living with this straight dark hair. Neither mousse
nor styling gel had the slightest effect on Sophie’s hair. Sometimes
she thought she was so ugly that she wondered if she was malformed
at birth. Her mother always went on about her difficult labor. But
was that really what determined how you looked?
Wasn’t it odd that she didn’t know who she was? And wasn’t
it unreasonable that she hadn’t been allowed to have any say in what
she would look like? Her looks had just been dumped on her. She
could choose her own friends, but she certainly hadn’t chosen
herself. She had not even chosen to be a human being.
What was a human being?
Sophie looked up at the girl in the mirror again.
“I think I’ll go upstairs and do my biology homework,” she
said, almost apologetically. Once she was out in the hall, she
thought, No, I’d rather go out in the garden.
6
“Kitty, kitty, kitty!”
Sophie chased the cat out onto the doorstep and closed the front
door behind her.
As she stood outside on the gravel path with the mysterious
letter in her hand, the strangest feeling came over her. She felt like
a doll that had suddenly been brought to life by the wave of a magic
wand.
Wasn’t it extraordinary to be in the world right now, wandering
around in a wonderful adventure!
Sherekan sprang lightly across the gravel and slid into a dense
clump of red-currant bushes. A live cat, vibrant with energy from its
white whiskers to the twitching tail at the end of its sleek body. It
was here in the garden too, but hardly aware of it in the same way
as Sophie.
As Sophie started to think about being alive, she began to
realize that she would not be alive forever. I am in the world now,
she thought, but one day I shall be gone.
Was there a life after death? This was another question the cat
was blissfully unaware of.
It was not long since Sophie’s grandmother had died. For more
than six months Sophie had missed her every single day. How unfair
that life had to end!
Sophie stood on the gravel path, thinking. She tried to think
extra hard about being alive so as to forget that she would not be
alive forever. But it was impossible. As soon as she concentrated on
being alive now, the thought of dying also came into her mind. The
same thing happened the other way around: only by conjuring up an
intense feeling of one day being dead could she appreciate how
terribly good it was to be alive. It was like two sides of a coin that
she kept turning over and over. And the bigger and clearer one side
of the coin became, the bigger and clearer the other side became too.
You can’t experience being alive without realizing that you
have to die, she thought. But it’s just as impossible to realize you
have to die without thinking how incredibly amazing it is to be alive.
Sophie remembered Granny saying something like that the day
the doctor told her she was ill. “I never realized how rich life was 
7
until now,” she said.
How tragic that most people had to get ill before they
understood what a gift it was to be alive. Or else they had to find a
mysterious letter in the mailbox!
Perhaps she should go and see if any more letters had arrived.
Sophie hurried to the gate and looked inside the green mailbox. She
was startled to find that it contained another white envelope, exactly
like the first. But the mailbox had definitely been empty when she
took the first envelope! This envelope had her name on it as well.
She tore it open and fished out a note the same size as the first one.
Where does the world come from? it said.
I don’t know, Sophie thought. Surely nobody really knows.
And yet—Sophie thought it was a fair question. For the first time in
her life she felt it wasn’t right to live in the world without at least
inquiring where it came from.
The mysterious letters had made Sophie’s head spin. She
decided to go and sit in the den.
The den was Sophie’s top secret hiding place. It was where she
went when she was terribly angry, terribly miserable, or terribly
happy. Today she was simply confused.
The red house was surrounded by a large garden with lots of
flowerbeds, fruit bushes, fruit trees of different kinds, a spacious
lawn with a glider and a little gazebo that Granddad had built for
Granny when she lost their first child a few weeks after it was born.
The child’s name was Marie. On her gravestone were the words:
“Little Marie to us came, greeted us, and left again.”
Down in a corner of the garden behind all the raspberry bushes
was a dense thicket where neither flowers nor berries would grow.
Actually, it was an old hedge that had once marked the boundary to
the woods, but because nobody had trimmed it for the last twenty
years it had grown into a tangled and impenetrable mass. Granny
used to say the hedge made it harder for the foxes to take the
chickens during the war, when the chickens had free range of the
garden.
To everyone but Sophie, the old hedge was just as useless as
the rabbit hutches at the other end of the garden. But that was only 
8
because they hadn’t discovered Sophie’s secret.
Sophie had known about the little hole in the hedge for as long
as she could remember. When she crawled through it she came into
a large cavity between the bushes. It was like a little house. She
knew nobody would find her there.
Clutching the two envelopes in her hand, Sophie ran through
the garden, crouched down on all fours, and wormed her way
through the hedge. The den was almost high enough for her to stand
upright, but today she sat down on a clump of gnarled roots. From
there she could look out through tiny peepholes between the twigs
and leaves. Although none of the holes was bigger than a small coin,
she had a good view of the whole garden. When she was little she
used to think it was fun to watch her mother and father searching for
her among the trees.
Sophie had always thought the garden was a world of its own.
Each time she heard about the Garden of Eden in the Bible it
reminded her of sitting here in the den, surveying her own little
paradise.
Where does the world come from?
She hadn’t the faintest idea. Sophie knew that the world was
only a small planet in space. But where did space come from?
It was possible that space had always existed, in which case she
would not also need to figure out where it came from. But could
anything have always existed? Something deep down inside her
protested at the idea. Surely everything that exists must have had a
beginning? So space must sometime have been created out of
something else.
But if space had come from something else, then that
something else must also have come from something. Sophie felt
she was only deferring the problem. At some point, something must
have come from nothing. But was that possible? Wasn’t that just as
impossible as the idea that the world had always existed?
They had learned at school that God created the world. Sophie
tried to console herself with the thought that this was probably the
best solution to the whole problem. But then she started to think
again. She could accept that God had created space, but what about 
9
God himself? Had he created himself out of nothing? Again there
was something deep down inside her that protested. Even though
God could create all kinds of things, he could hardly create himself
before he had a “self” to create with. So there was only one
possibility left: God had always existed. But she had already
rejected that possibility! Everything that existed had to have a
beginning.
Oh, drat!
She opened the two envelopes again.
Who are you?
Where does the world come from?
What annoying questions! And anyway where did the letters
come from? That was just as mysterious, almost.
Who had jolted Sophie out of her everyday existence and
suddenly brought her face to face with the great riddles of the
universe?
For the third time Sophie went to the mailbox. The mailman
had just delivered the day’s mail.
Sophie fished out a bulky pile of junk mail, periodicals, and a
couple of letters for her mother. There was also a postcard of a
tropical beach. She turned the card over. It had a Norwegian stamp
on it and was postmarked “UN Battalion.” Could it be from Dad?
But wasn’t he in a completely different place? It wasn’t his
handwriting either.
Sophie felt her pulse quicken a little as she saw who the
postcard was addressed to: “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Sophie
Amundsen, 3 Clover Close ...” The rest of the address was correct.
The card read:
Dear Hilde, Happy 15th birthday! As I’m sure you’ll
understand, I want to give you a present that will help you grow.
Forgive me for sending the card c/o Sophie. It was the easiest way.
Love from Dad.
Sophie raced back to the house and into the kitchen. Her mind
was in a turmoil. Who was this “Hilde,” whose fifteenth birthday 
10
was just a month before her own?
Sophie got out the telephone book. There were a lot of people
called Moller, and quite a few called Knag. But there was nobody in
the entire directory called Moller Knag.
She examined the mysterious card again. It certainly seemed
genuine enough; it had a stamp and a postmark.
Why would a father send a birthday card to Sophie’s address
when it was quite obviously intended to go somewhere else? What
kind of father would cheat his own daughter of a birthday card by
purposely sending it astray? How could it be “the easiest way”? And
above all, how was she supposed to trace this Hilde person?
So now Sophie had another problem to worry about. She tried
to get her thoughts in order:
This afternoon, in the space of two short hours, she had been
presented with three problems. The first problem was who had put
the two white envelopes in her mailbox. The second was the difficult
questions these letters contained. The third problem was who Hilde
Moller Knag could be, and why Sophie had been sent her birthday
card. She was sure that the three problems were interconnected in
some way. They had to be, because until today she had lived a
perfectly ordinary life.
11
THE TOP HAT
… the only thing we require
to be good philosophers is the
faculty of wonder...
Sophie was sure she would hear from the anonymous letter
writer again. She decided not to tell anyone about the letters for the
time being.
At school she had trouble concentrating on what the teachers
said. They seemed to talk only about unimportant things. Why
couldn’t they talk about what a human being is—or about what the
world is and how it came into being?
For the first time she began to feel that at school as well as
everywhere else people were only concerned with trivialities. There
were major problems that needed to be solved.
Did anybody have answers to these questions? Sophie felt that
thinking about them was more important than memorizing irregular
verbs.
When the bell rang after the last class, she left the school so fast
that Joanna had to run to catch up with her.
After a while Joanna said, “Do you want to play cards this
evening?” Sophie shrugged her shoulders.
“I’m not that interested in card games anymore.” Joanna looked
surprised.
“You’re not? Let’s play badminton then.”
Sophie stared down at the pavement—then up at her friend. “I
don’t think I’m that interested in badminton either.” “You’re
kidding!”
Sophie noticed the touch of bitterness in Joanna’s tone. “Do
you mind telling me what’s suddenly so important?” Sophie just
shook her head. “It’s ... it’s a secret.”
“Yuck! You’re probably in love!”
The two girls walked on for a while without saying anything.
When they got to the soccer field Joanna said, “I’m going across the
field.”
12
Across the field! It was the quickest way for Joanna, but she
only went that way when she had to hurry home in time for visitors
or a dental appointment.
Sophie regretted having been mean to her. But what else could
she have said? That she had suddenly become so engrossed in who
she was and where the world came from that she had no time to play
badminton? Would Joanna have understood?
Why was it so difficult to be absorbed in the most vital and, in
a way, the most natural of all questions?
She felt her heart beating faster as she opened the mailbox. At
first she found only a letter from the bank and some big brown
envelopes for her mother. Darn! Sophie had been looking forward
to getting another letter from the unknown sender.
As she closed the gate behind her she noticed her own name on
one of the big envelopes. Turning it over, she saw written on the
back: “Course in Philosophy. Handle with care.”
Sophie ran up the gravel path and flung her schoolbag onto the
step. Stuffing the other letters under the doormat, she ran around into
the back garden and sought refuge in the den. This was the only
place to open the big letter.
Sherekan came jumping after her but Sophie had to put up with
that. She knew the cat would not give her away.
Inside the envelope there were three typewritten pages held
together with a paper clip. Sophie began to read.
WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY?
Dear Sophie,
Lots of people have hobbies. Some people collect old coins or
foreign stamps, some do needlework, others spend most of their
spare time on a particular sport.
A lot of people enjoy reading. But reading tastes differ widely.
Some people only read newspapers or comics, some like reading
novels, while others prefer books on astronomy, wildlife, or
technological discoveries.
13
If I happen to be interested in horses or precious stones, I
cannot expect everyone else to share my enthusiasm. If I watch all
the sports programs on TV with great pleasure, I must put up with
the fact that other people find sports boring.
Is there nothing that interests us all? Is there nothing that
concerns everyone—no matter who they are or where they live in
the world? Yes, dear Sophie, there are questions that certainly
should interest everyone. They are precisely the questions this
course is about.
What is the most important thing in life? If we ask someone
living on the edge of starvation, the answer is food. If we ask
someone dying of cold, the answer is warmth. If we put the same
question to someone who feels lonely and isolated, the answer will
probably be the company of other people.
But when these basic needs have been satisfied—will there still
be something that everybody needs? Philosophers think so. They
believe that man cannot live by bread alone. Of course everyone
needs food. And everyone needs love and care. But there is
something else—apart from that—which everyone needs, and that
is to figure out who we are and why we are here.
Being interested in why we are here is not a “casual” interest
like collecting stamps.
People who ask such questions are taking part in a debate that
has gone on as long as man has lived on this planet. How the
universe, the earth, and life came into being is a bigger and more
important question than who won the most gold medals in the last
Olympics.
The best way of approaching philosophy is to ask a few
philosophical questions:
How was the world created? Is there any will or meaning
behind what happens? Is there a life after death? How can we answer
these questions? And most important, how ought we to live? People
have been asking these questions throughout the ages. We know of
no culture which has not concerned itself with what man is and
where the world came from.
Basically there are not many philosophical questions to ask. 
14
We have already asked some of the most important ones. But history
presents us with many different answers to each question. So it is
easier to ask philosophical questions than to answer them.
Today as well each individual has to discover his own answer
to these same questions. You cannot find out whether there is a God
or whether there is life after death by looking in an encyclopedia.
Nor does the encyclopedia tell us how we ought to live. However,
reading what other people have believed can help us formulate our
own view of life.
Philosophers’ search for the truth resembles a detective story.
Some think Andersen was the murderer, others think it was Nielsen
or Jensen. The police are sometimes able to solve a real crime. But
it is equally possible that they never get to the bottom of it, although
there is a solution somewhere. So even if it is difficult to answer a
question, there may be one—and only one—right answer. Either
there is a kind of existence after death—or there is not.
A lot of age-old enigmas have now been explained by science.
What the dark side of the moon looks like was once shrouded in
mystery. It was not the kind of thing that could be solved by
discussion, it was left to the imagination of the individual. But today
we know exactly what the dark side of the moon looks like, and no
one can “believe” any longer in the Man in the Moon, or that the
moon is made of green cheese.
A Greek philosopher who lived more than two thousand years
ago believed that philosophy had its origin in man’s sense of
wonder. Man thought it was so astonishing to be alive that
philosophical questions arose of their own accord.
It is like watching a magic trick. We cannot understand how it
is done. So we ask: how can the magician change a couple of white
silk scarves into a live rabbit?
A lot of people experience the world with the same incredulity
as when a magician suddenly pulls a rabbit out of a hat which has
just been shown to them empty.
In the case of the rabbit, we know the magician has tricked us.
What we would like to know is just how he did it. But when it comes
to the world it’s somewhat different. We know that the world is not
15
all sleight of hand and deception because here we are in it, we are
part of it. Actually, we are the white rabbit being pulled out of the
hat. The only difference between us and the white rabbit is that the
rabbit does not realize it is taking part in a magic trick. Unlike us.
We feel we are part of something mysterious and we would like to
know how it all works.
P.S. As far as the white rabbit is concerned, it might be better
to compare it with the whole universe. We who live here are
microscopic insects existing deep down in the rabbit’s fur. But
philosophers are always trying to climb up the fine hairs of the fur
in order to stare right into the magician’s eyes.
Are you still there, Sophie? To be continued . . .
Sophie was completely exhausted. Still there? She could not
even remember if she had taken the time to breathe while she read.
Who had brought this letter? It couldn’t be the same person
who had sent the birthday card to Hilde Moller Knag because that
card had both a stamp and a postmark. The brown envelope had been
delivered by hand to the mailbox exactly like the two white ones.
Sophie looked at her watch. It was a quarter to three. Her
mother would not be home from work for over two hours.
Sophie crawled out into the garden again and ran to the
mailbox. Perhaps there was another letter. She found one more
brown envelope with her name on it. This time she looked all around
but there was nobody in sight. Sophie ran to the edge of the woods
and looked down the path.
No one was there. Suddenly she thought she heard a twig snap
deep in the woods. But she was not completely sure, and anyway it
would be pointless to chase after someone who was determined to
get away.
Sophie let herself into the house. She ran upstairs to her room
and took out a big cookie tin full of pretty stones. She emptied the
stones onto the floor and put both large envelopes into the tin. Then
she hurried out into the garden again, holding the tin securely with
both hands. Before she went she put some food out for Sherekan.
“Kitty, kitty, kitty!”
Once back in the den she opened the second brown envelope 
16
and drew out the new typewritten pages. She began to read.
A STRANGE CREATURE
Hello again! As you see, this short course in philosophy will
come in handy-sized portions. Here are a few more introductory
remarks:
Did I say that the only thing we require to be good philosophers
is the faculty of wonder? If I did not, I say it now: THE ONLY
THING WE REQUIRE TO BE GOOD PHILOSOPHERS IS THE
FACULTY OF WONDER.
Babies have this faculty. That is not surprising. After a few
short months in the womb they slip out into a brand-new reality. But
as they grow up the faculty of wonder seems to diminish. Why is
this? Do you know?
If a newborn baby could talk, it would probably say something
about what an extraordinary world it had come into. We see how it
looks around and reaches out in curiosity to everything it sees.
As words are gradually acquired, the child looks up and says
“Bow-wow” every time it sees a dog. It jumps up and down in its
stroller, waving its arms: “Bow-wow! Bow-wow!” We who are
older and wiser may feel somewhat exhausted by the child’s
enthusiasm. “All right, all right, it’s a bow-wow,” we say,
unimpressed. “Please sit still.” We are not enthralled. We have seen
a dog before.
This rapturous performance may repeat itself hundreds of times
before the child learns to pass a dog without going crazy. Or an
elephant, or a hippopotamus. But long before the child learns to talk
properly—and Ion before it learns to think philosophically—the
world we have become a habit.
A pity, if you ask me.
My concern is that you do not grow up to be one of those people
who take the world for granted, Sophie dear. So just to make sure,
we are going to do a couple of experiments in thought before we
begin on the course itself.
Imagine that one day you are out for a walk in the woods.
Suddenly you see a small spaceship on the path in front of you. A 
17
tiny Martian climbs out of the spaceship and stands on the ground
looking up at you . . .
What would you think? Never mind, it’s not important. But
have you ever given any thought to the fact that you are a Martian
yourself?
It is obviously unlikely that you will ever stumble upon a
creature from another planet. We do not even know that there is life
on other planets. But you might stumble upon yourself one day. You
might suddenly stop short and see yourself in a completely new
light. On just such a walk in the woods.
I am an extraordinary being, you think. I am a mysterious
creature.
You feel as if you are waking from an enchanted slumber. Who
am I? you ask. You know that you are stumbling around on a planet
in the universe. But what is the universe?
If you discover yourself in this manner you will have
discovered something as mysterious as the Martian we just
mentioned. You will not only have seen a being from outer space.
You will feel deep down that you are yourself an extraordinary
being.
Do you follow me, Sophie? Let’s do another experiment in
thought:
One morning, Mom, Dad, and little Thomas, aged two or three,
are having breakfast in the kitchen. After a while Mom gets up and
goes over to the kitchen sink, and Dad—yes, Dad—flies up and
floats around under the ceiling while Thomas sits watching. What
do you think Thomas says? Perhaps he points up at his father and
says: “Daddy’s flying!” Thomas will certainly be astonished, but
then he very often is. Dad does so many strange things that this
business of a little flight over the breakfast table makes no difference
to him. Every day Dad shaves with a funny machine, sometimes he
climbs onto the roof and turns the TV aerial—or else he sticks his
head under the hood of the car and comes up black in the face.
Now it’s Mom’s turn. She hears what Thomas says and turns
around abruptly. How do you think she reacts to the sight of Dad
floating nonchalantly over the kitchen table?
18
She drops the jam jar on the floor and screams with fright. She
may even need medical attention once Dad has returned respectably
to his chair. (He should have learned better table manners by now!)
Why do you think Thomas and his mother react so differently?
It all has to do with habit. (Note this!) Mom has learned that
people cannot fly. Thomas has not. He still isn’t certain what you
can and cannot do in this world.
But what about the world itself, Sophie? Do you think it can do
what it does? The world is also floating in space.
Sadly it is not only the force of gravity we get used to as we
grow up. The world itself becomes a habit in no time at all. It seems
as if in the process of growing up we lose the ability to wonder about
the world. And in doing so, we lose something central—something
philosophers try to restore. For somewhere inside ourselves,
something tells us that life is a huge mystery. This is something we
once experienced, long before we learned to think the thought.
To be more precise: Although philosophical questions concern
us all, we do not all become philosophers. For various reasons most
people get so caught up in everyday affairs that their astonishment
at the world gets pushed into the background. (They crawl deep into
the rabbit’s fur, snuggle down comfortably, and stay there for the
rest of their lives.)
To children, the world and everything in it is new, something
that gives rise to astonishment. It is not like that for adults. Most
adults accept the world as a matter of course.
This is precisely where philosophers are a notable exception. A
philosopher never gets quite used to the world. To him or her, the
world continues to seem a bit unreasonable—bewildering, even
enigmatic. Philosophers and small children thus have an important
faculty in common. You might say that throughout his life a
philosopher remains as thin-skinned as a child.
So now you must choose, Sophie. Are you a child who has not
yet become world-weary?
Or are you a philosopher who will vow never to become so?
If you just shake your head, not recognizing yourself as either
a child or a philosopher, then you have gotten so used to the world 
19
that it no longer astonishes you. Watch out! You are on thin ice. And
this is why you are receiving this course in philosophy, just in case.
I will not allow you, of all people, to join the ranks of the apathetic
and the indifferent. I want you to have an inquiring mind.
The whole course is free of charge, so you get no money back
if you do not complete it. If you choose to break off the course you
are free to do so. In that case you must leave a message for me in
the mailbox. A live frog would be eminently suitable. Something
green, at least, otherwise the mailman might get scared.
To summarize briefly: A white rabbit is pulled out of a top hat.
Because it is an extremely large rabbit, the trick takes many billions
of years. All mortals are born at the very tip of the rabbit’s fine hairs,
where they are in a position to wonder at the impossibility of the
trick. But as they grow older they work themselves ever deeper into
the fur. And there they stay. They become so comfortable they never
risk crawling back up the fragile hairs again. Only philosophers
embark on this perilous expedition to the outermost reaches of
language and existence. Some of them fall off, but others cling on
desperately and yell at the people nestling deep in the snug softness,
stuffing themselves with delicious food and drink.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” they yell, “we are floating in space!”
But none of the people down there care.
“What a bunch of troublemakers!” they say. And they keep on
chatting: Would you pass the butter, please? How much have our
stocks risen today? What is the price of tomatoes?
Have you heard that Princess Di is expecting again?
When Sophie’s mother got home later that afternoon, Sophie
was practically in shock. The tin containing the letters from the
mysterious philosopher was safely hidden in the den. Sophie had
tried to start her homework but could only sit thinking about what
she had read.
She had never thought so hard before! She was no longer a
child—but she wasn’t really grown up either. Sophie realized that
she had already begun to crawl down into the cozy rabbit’s fur, the
very same rabbit that had been pulled from the top hat of the
universe. But the philosopher had stopped her. He—or was it a 
20
she?—had grabbed her by the back of the neck and pulled her up
again to the tip of the fur where she had played as a child. And there,
on the outermost tips of the fine hairs, she was once again seeing the
world as if for the very first time.
The philosopher had rescued her. No doubt about it. The
unknown letter writer had saved her from the triviality of everyday
existence.
When Mom got home at five o’clock, Sophie dragged her into
the living room and pushed her into an armchair.
“Mom—don’t you think it’s astonishing to be alive?” she
began.
Her mother was so surprised that she didn’t answer at first.
Sophie was usually doing her homework when she got home.
“I suppose I do—sometimes,” she said.
“Sometimes? Yes, but—don’t you think it’s astonishing that
the world exists at all?” “Now look, Sophie. Stop talking like that.”
“Why? Perhaps you think the world is quite normal?” “Well,
isn’t it? More or less, anyway.”
Sophie saw that the philosopher was right. Grownups took the
world for granted. They had let themselves be lulled into the
enchanted sleep of their humdrum existence once and for all.
“You’ve just grown so used to the world that nothing surprises
you anymore.” “What on earth are you talking about?”
“I’m talking about you getting so used to everything. Totally
dim, in other words.” “I will not be spoken to like that, Sophie!”
“All right, I’ll put it another way. You’ve made yourself
comfortable deep down in the fur of a white rabbit that is being
pulled out of the universe’s top hat right now. And in a minute you’ll
put the potatoes on. Then you’ll read the paper and after half an
hour’s nap you’ll watch the news on TV!”
An anxious expression came over her mother’s face. She did
indeed go into the kitchen and put the potatoes on. After a while she
came back into the living room, and this time it was she who pushed
Sophie into an armchair.
“There’s something I must talk to you about,” she began.
Sophie could tell by her voice that it was something serious.
21
“You haven’t gotten yourself mixed up with drugs, have you,
dear?”
Sophie was just about to laugh, but she understood why the
question was being brought up now. “Are you nuts?” she said. “That
only makes you duller’.”
No more was said that evening about either drugs or white
rabbits.
22
THE MYTHS
... a precarious balance between
the forces of good and evil …
There was no letter for Sophie the next morning. All through the
interminable day at school she was bored stiff. She took care to be
extra nice to Joanna during the breaks. On the way home they talked
about going camping as soon as the woods were dry enough.
After what seemed an eternity she was once again at the
mailbox. First she opened a letter postmarked in Mexico. It was
from her father. He wrote about how much he was longing for home
and how for the first time he had managed to beat the Chief Officer
at chess. Apart from that he had almost finished the pile of books he
had brought aboard with him after his winter leave.
And then, there it was—a brown envelope with her name on it!
Leaving her schoolbag and the rest of the mail in the house, Sophie
ran to the den. She pulled out the new typewritten pages and began
to read:
THE MYTHOLOGICAL WORLD PICTURE
Hello there, Sophie! We have a lot to do, so we’ll get started
without delay.
By philosophy we mean the completely new way of thinking
that evolved in Greece about six hundred years before the birth of
Christ. Until that time people had found answers to all their
questions in various religions. These religious explanations were
handed down from generation to generation in the form of myths. A
myth is a story about the gods which sets out to explain why life is
as it is.
Over the millennia a wild profusion of mythological
explanations of philosophical questions spread across the world.
The Greek philosophers attempted to prove that these explanations 
23
were not to be trusted.
In order to understand how the early philosophers thought, we
have to understand what it was like to have a mythological picture
of the world. We can take some Nordic myths as examples. (There
is no need to carry coals to Newcastle.)
You have probably heard of Thor and his hammer. Before
Christianity came to Norway, people believed that Thor rode across
the sky in a chariot drawn by two goats. When he swung his hammer
it made thunder and lightning. The word “thunder” in Norwegian—
“Thordon”—means Thor’s roar. In Swedish, the word for thunder is
“aska,” originally “as-aka,” which means “god’s journey” over the
heavens.
When there is thunder and lightning there is also rain, which
was vital to the Viking farmers. So Thor was worshipped as the god
of fertility.
The mythological explanation for rain was therefore that Thor
was swinging his hammer.
And when it rained the corn germinated and thrived in the
fields.
How the plants of the field could grow and yield crops was not
understood. But it was clearly somehow connected with the rain.
And since everybody believed that the rain had something to do with
Thor, he was one of the most important of the Norse gods.
There was another reason why Thor was important, a reason
related to the entire world order.
The Vikings believed that the inhabited world was an island
under constant threat from outside dangers. They called this part of
the world Midgard, which means the kingdom in the middle. Within
Midgard lay Asgard, the domain of the gods.
Outside Midgard was the kingdom of Utgard, the domain of the
treacherous giants, who resorted to all kinds of cunning tricks to try
and destroy the world. Evil monsters like these are often referred to
as the “forces of chaos.” Not only in Norse mythology but in almost
all other cultures, people found that there was a precarious balance
between the forces of good and evil.
One of the ways in which the giants could destroy Midgard 
24
was by abducting Freyja, the goddess of fertility. If they could do
this, nothing would grow in the fields and the women would no
longer have children. So it was vital to hold these giants in check.
Thor was a central figure in this battle with the giants. His
hammer could do more than make rain; it was a key weapon in the
struggle against the dangerous forces of chaos. It gave him almost
unlimited power. For example, he could hurl it at the giants and slay
them. And he never had to worry about losing it because it always
came back to him, just like a boomerang.
This was the mythological explanation for how the balance of
nature was maintained and why there was a constant struggle
between good and evil. And this was precisely the kind of
explanation that the philosophers rejected.
But it was not a question of explanations alone.
Mortals could not just sit idly by and wait for the gods to
intervene while catastrophes such as drought or plague loomed.
They had to act for themselves in the struggle against evil. This they
did by performing various religious ceremonies, or rites.
The most significant religious ceremony in Norse times was the
offering. Making an offering to a god had the effect of increasing
that god’s power. For example, mortals had to make offerings to the
gods to give them the strength to conquer the forces of chaos. They
could do this by sacrificing an animal to the god. The offering to
Thor was usually a goat.
Offerings to Odin sometimes took the form of human
sacrifices.
The myth that is best known in the Nordic countries comes
from the Eddie poem “The Lay of Thrym.” It tells how Thor, rising
from sleep, finds that his hammer is gone. This makes him so angry
that his hands tremble and his beard shakes. Accompanied by his
henchman Loki he goes to Freyja to ask if Loki may borrow her
wings so that he can fly to Jotunheim, the land of the giants, and find
out if they are the ones who have stolen Thor’s hammer.
At Jotunheim Loki meets Thrym, the king of the giants, who
sure enough begins to boast that he has hidden the hammer seven
leagues under the earth. And he adds that the gods will not get the 
25
hammer back until Thrym is given Freyja as his bride.
Can you picture it, Sophie? Suddenly the good gods find
themselves in the midst of a full-blown hostage incident. The giants
have seized the gods’ most vital defensive weapon. This is an utterly
unacceptable situation. As long as the giants have Thor’s hammer,
they have total control over the world of gods and mortals. In
exchange for the hammer they are demanding Freyja. But this is
equally unacceptable. If the gods have to give up their goddess of
fertility— she who protects all life—the grass will disappear from
the fields and all gods and mortals will die. The situation is
deadlocked.
Loki returns to Asgard, so the myth goes, and tells Freyja to put
on her wedding attire for she is (alas!) to wed the king of the giants.
Freyja is furious, and says people will think she is absolutely mancrazy if she agrees to marry a giant.
Then the god Heimdall has an idea. He suggests that Thor dress
up as a bride. With his hair up and two stones under his tunic he will
look like a woman. Understandably, Thor is not wildly enthusiastic
about the idea, but he finally accepts that this is the only way he will
ever get his hammer back.
So Thor allows himself to be attired in bridal costume, with
Loki as his bridesmaid. To put it in present-day terms, Thor and Loki
are the gods’ “anti-terrorist squad.”
Disguised as women, their mission is to breach the giants’
stronghold and recapture Thor’s hammer.
When the gods arrive at Jotunheim, the giants begin to prepare
the wedding feast. But during the feast, the bride—Thor, that is—
devours an entire ox and eight salmon. He also drinks three barrels
of beer. This astonishes Thrym. The true identity of the
“commandos” is very nearly revealed. But Loki manages to avert
the danger by explaining that Freyja has been looking forward to
coming to jotunheim so much that she has not eaten for a week.
When Thrym lifts the bridal veil to kiss the bride, he is startled
to find himself looking into Thor’s burning eyes. Once again Loki
saves the situation by explaining that the bride has not slept for a
week because she is so excited about the wedding. At this, Thrym
26
commands that the hammer be brought forth and laid in the bride’s
lap during the wedding ceremony.
Thor roars with laughter when he is given the hammer. First he
kills Thrym with it, and then he wipes out the giants and all their
kin. And thus the gruesome hostage affair has a happy ending.
Thor—the Batman or James Bond of the gods—has once again
conquered the forces of evil.
So much for the myth itself, Sophie. But what is the real
meaning behind it? It wasn’t made up just for entertainment. The
myth also tries to explain something. Here is one possible
interpretation:
When a drought occurred, people sought an explanation of why
there was no rain. Could it be that the giants had stolen Thor’s
hammer?
Perhaps the myth was an attempt to explain the changing
seasons of the year: in the winter Nature dies because Thor’s
hammer is in jotunheim. But in the spring he succeeds in winning it
back. So the myth tried to give people an explanation for something
they could not understand.
But a myth was not only an explanation. People also carried out
religious ceremonies related to the myths. We can imagine how
people’s response to drought or crop failure would be to enact a
drama about the events in the myth. Perhaps a man from the village
would dress up as a bride—with stones for breasts—in order to steal
the hammer back from the giants. By doing this, people were taking
some action to make it rain so the crops would grow in their fields.
There are a great many examples from other parts of the world
of the way people dramatized their myths of the seasons in order to
speed up the processes of nature.
So far we have only taken a brief glimpse at the world of Norse
mythology. But there were countless myths about Thor and Odin,
Freyr and Frey a, Hoder and Balder and many other gods.
Mythologica notions of this kind flourished all over the world until
philosophers began to tamper with them.
A mythological world picture also existed in Greece when the
first philosophy was evolving. The stories of the Greek gods had 
27
been handed down from generation to generation for centuries. In
Greece the gods were called Zeus and Apollo, Hera and Athene,
Dionysos and Ascle-pios, Heracles and Hephaestos, to mention only
a few of them.
Around 700 B.C., much of the Greek mythology was written
down by Homer and Hesiod. This created a whole new situation.
Now that the myths existed in written form, it was possible to
discuss them.
The earliest Greek philosophers criticized Homer’s mythology
because the gods resembled mortals too much and were just as
egoistic and treacherous. For the first time it was said that the myths
were nothing but human notions.
One exponent of this view was the philosopher Xe-nophanes,
who lived from about 570
B.C. Men have created the gods in their own image, he said.
They believe the gods were born and have bodies and clothes and
language just as we have. Ethiopians believe that the gods are black
and flat-nosed, Thracians imagine them to be blue-eyed and fairhaired. If oxen, horses, and lions could draw, they would depict gods
that looked like oxen, horses, and lions!
During that period the Greeks founded many city-states, both
in Greece itself and in the Greek colonies in Southern Italy and Asia
Minor, where all manual work was done by slaves, leaving the
citizens free to devote all their time to politics and culture.
In these city environments people began to think in a
completely new way. Purely on his own behalf, any citizen could
question the way society ought to be organized. Individuals could
thus also ask philosophical questions without recourse to ancient
myths.
We call this the development from a mythological mode of
thought to one based on experience and reason. The aim of the early
Greek philosophers was to find natural, rather than supernatural,
explanations for natural processes.
Sophie left the den and wandered about in the large garden. She
tried to forget what she had learned at school, especially in science
classes.
28
If she had grown up in this garden without knowing anything
at all about nature, how would she feel about the spring?
Would she try to invent some kind of explanation for why it
suddenly started to rain one day?
Would she work out some fantasy to explain where the snow
went and why the sun rose in the morning?
Yes, she definitely would. She began to make up a story:
Winter held the land in its icy grip because the evil Muriat had
imprisoned the beautiful Princess Sikita in a cold prison. But one
morning the brave Prince Bravato came and rescued her. Sikita was
so happy that she began to dance over the meadows, singing a song
she had composed inside the dank prison. The earth and the trees
were so moved that all the snow turned into tears. But then the sun
came out and dried all the tears away. The birds imitated Sikita’s
song, and when the beautiful princess let down her golden tresses, a
few locks of her hair fell onto the earth and turned into the lilies of
the field ...
Sophie liked her beautiful story. If she had not known any other
explanation for the changing seasons, she felt sure she would have
come to believe her own story in the end.
She understood that people had always felt a need to explain
the processes of nature. Perhaps they could not live without such
explanations. And that they made up all those myths in the time
before there was anything called science.
29
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS
… nothing can come from nothing …
When her mother got home from work that afternoon Sophie
was sitting in the glider, pondering the possible connection between
the philosophy course and Hilde Moller Knag, who would not be
getting a birthday card from her father.
Her mother called from the other end of the garden, “Sophie!
There’s a letter for you!”
She caught her breath. She had already emptied the mailbox, so
the letter had to be from the philosopher. What on earth would she
say to her mother?
“There’s no stamp on it. It’s probably a love letter!” Sophie
took the letter.
“Aren’t you going to open it?” She had to find an excuse.
“Have you ever heard of anyone opening a love letter with her
mother looking over her shoulder?”
Let her mother think it was a love letter. Although it was
embarrassing enough, it would be even worse if her mother found
out that she was doing a correspondence course with a complete
stranger, a philosopher who was playing hide-and-seek with her.
It was one of the little white envelopes. When Sophie got
upstairs to her room, she found three new questions:
Is there a basic substance that everything else is made of?
Can water turn into wine?
How can earth and water produce a live frog!
Sophie found the questions pretty stupid, but nevertheless they kept
buzzing around in her head all evening. She was still thinking about
them at school the next day, examining them one by one.
Could there be a “basic substance” that everything was made
of? If there was some such substance, how could it suddenly turn
into a flower or an elephant?
30
The same objection applied to the question of whether water
could turn into wine. Sophie knew the parable of how Jesus turned
water into wine, but she had never taken it literally. And if Jesus
really had turned water into wine, it was because it was a miracle,
something that could not be done normally. Sophie knew there was
a lot of water, not only in wine but in all other growing things. But
even if a cucumber was 95 percent water, there must be something
else in it as well, because a cucumber was a cucumber, not water.
And then there was the question about the frog. Her philosophy
teacher had this really weird thing about frogs.
Sophie could possibly accept that a frog consisted of earth and
water, in which case the earth must consist of more than one kind of
substance. If the earth consisted of a lot of different substances, it
was obviously possible that earth and water together could produce
a frog. That is, if the earth and the water went via frog spawn and
tadpoles. Because a frog could not just grow out of a cabbage patch,
however much you watered it.
When she got home from school that day there was a fat
envelope waiting for her in the mailbox.
Sophie hid in the den just as she had done the other days.
THE PHILOSOPHERS’ PROJECT
Here we are again! We’ll go directly to today’s lesson without
detours around white rabbits and the like.
I’ll outline very broadly the way people have thought about
philosophy, from the ancient Greeks right up to our own day. But
we’ll take things in their correct order.
Since some philosophers lived in a different age—and perhaps
in a completely different culture from ours—it is a good idea to try
and see what each philosopher’s project is. By this I mean that we
must try to grasp precisely what it is that each particular philosopher
is especially concerned with finding out. One philosopher might
want to know how plants and animals came into being. Another
might want to know whether there is a God or whether man has an
immortal soul.
31
Once we have determined what a particular philosopher’s
project is, it is easier to follow his line of thought, since no one
philosopher concerns himself with the whole of philosophy.
I said his line of thought—referring to the philosopher, because
this is also a story of men. Women of the past were subjugated both
as females and as thinking beings, which is sad because a great deal
of very important experience was lost as a result. It was not until this
century that women really made their mark on the history of
philosophy.
I do not intend to give you any homework—no difficult math
questions, or anything like that, and conjugating English verbs is
outside my sphere of interest. However, from time to time I’ll give
you a short assignment.
If you accept these conditions, we’ll begin.
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS
The earliest Greek philosophers are sometimes called natural
philosophers because they were mainly concerned with the natural
world and its processes.
We have already asked ourselves where everything comes
from. Nowadays a lot of people imagine that at some time something
must have come from nothing. This idea was not so widespread
among the Greeks. For one reason or another, they assumed that
“something” had always existed.
How everything could come from nothing was therefore not the
all-important question. On the other hand the Greeks marveled at
how live fish could come from water, and huge trees and brilliantly
colored flowers could come from the dead earth. Not to mention
how a baby could come from its mother’s womb!
The philosophers observed with their own eyes that nature was
in a constant state of transformation. But how could such
transformations occur?
How could something change from being substance to being a
living thing, for example?
32
All the earliest philosophers shared the belief that there had to
be a certain basic substance at the root of all change. How they
arrived at this idea is hard to say. We only know that the notion
gradually evolved that there must be a basic substance that was the
hidden cause of all changes in nature. There had to be “something”
that all things came from and returned to.
For us, the most interesting part is actually not what solutions
these earliest philosophers arrived at, but which questions they
asked and what type of answer they were looking for. We are more
interested in how they thought than in exactly what they thought.
We know that they posed questions relating to the
transformations they could observe in the physical world. They were
looking for the underlying laws of nature. They wanted to
understand what was happening around them without having to turn
to the ancient myths. And most important, they wanted to
understand the actual processes by studying nature itself. This was
quite different from explaining thunder and lightning or winter and
spring by telling stories about the gods.
So philosophy gradually liberated itself from religion. We
could say that the natural philosophers took the first step in the
direction of scientific reasoning, thereby becoming the precursors of
what was to become science.
Only fragments have survived of what the natural philosophers
said and wrote. What little we know is found in the writings of
Aristotle, who lived two centuries later. He refers only to the
conclusions the philosophers reached. So we do not always know by
what paths they reached these conclusions. But what we do know
enables us to establish that the earliest Greek philosophers’ project
concerned the question of a basic constituent substance and the
changes in nature.
THREE PHILOSOPHERS FROM MILETUS
The first philosopher we know of is Thales, who came from Miletus,
a Greek colony in Asia Minor. He traveled in many countries,
including Egypt, where he is said to have calculated the height of a
pyramid by measuring its shadow at the precise moment when the 
33
length of his own shadow was equal to his height. He is also said to
have accurately predicted a solar eclipse in the year 585 B.C.
Thales thought that the source of all things was water. We do
not know exactly what he meant by that, he may have believed that
all life originated from water—and that all life returns to water again
when it dissolves.
During his travels in Egypt he must have observed how the
crops began to grow as soon as the floods of the Nile receded from
the land areas in the Nile Delta. Perhaps he also noticed that frogs
and worms appeared wherever it had just been raining.
It is likely that Thales thought about the way water turns to ice
or vapor—and then turns back into water again.
Thales is also supposed to have said that “all things are full of
gods.” What he meant by that we can only surmise. Perhaps, seeing
how the black earth was the source of everything from flowers and
crops to insects and cockroaches, he imagined that the earth was
filled with tiny invisible “life-germs.” One thing is certain—he was
not talking about Homer’s gods.
The next philosopher we hear of is Anaximander, who also
lived in Miletus at about the same time as Thales. He thought that
our world was only one of a myriad of worlds that evolve and
dissolve in something he called the boundless. It is not so easy to
explain what he meant by the boundless, but it seems clear that he
was not thinking of a known substance in the way that Thales had
envisaged. Perhaps he meant that the substance which is the source
of all things had to be something other than the things created.
Because all created things are limited, that which comes before and
after them must be “boundless.” It is clear that this basic stuff could
not be anything as ordinary as water.
A third philosopher from Miletus was Anaximenes (c. 570—
526 B.C.). He thought that the source of all things must be “air” or
“vapor.” Anaximenes was of course familiar with Tholes’ theory of
water. But where does water come from? Anaximenes thought that
water was con- densed air. We observe that when it rains, water is
pressed from the air. When water is pressed even more, it becomes
earth, he thought. He may have seen how earth and sand were
pressed out of melting ice. He also thought that fire was rarefied air. 
34
According to Anaxi- menes, air was therefore the origin of earth,
water, and fire.
It is not a far cry from water to the fruit of the earth. Perhaps
Anaximenes thought that earth, air, and fire were all necessary to the
creation of life, but that the source of all things was air or vapor. So,
like Thales, he thought that there must be an underlying substance
that is the source of all natural change.
Nothing Can Come from Nothing
These three Milesian philosophers all believed in the existence of a
single basic substance as the source of all things. But how could one
substance suddenly change into something else? We can call this the
problem of change.
From about 500 B.C., there was a group of philosophers in the
Greek colony of Elea in Southern Italy. These “Eleatics” were
interested in this question.
The most important of these philosophers was Parmenides (c.
540-480 B.C.).
Parmenides thought that everything that exists had always
existed. This idea was not alien to the Greeks. They took it more or
less for granted that everything that existed in the world was
everlasting. Nothing can come out of nothing, thought Parmenides.
And nothing that exists can become nothing.
But Parmenides took the idea further. He thought that there was
no such thing as actual change. Nothing could become anything
other than it was.
Parmenides realized, of course, that nature is in a constant state
of flux. He perceived with his senses that things changed. But he
could not equate this with what his reason told him. When forced to
choose between relying either on his senses or his reason, he chose
reason.
You know the expression “I’ll believe it when I see it.” But
Parmenides didn’t even believe things when he saw them. He
believed that our senses give us an incorrect picture of the world, a
picture that does not tally with our reason. As a philosopher, he saw
it as his task to expose all forms of perceptual illusion.
35
This unshakable faith in human reason is called rationalism. A
rationalist is someone who believes that human reason is the primary
source of our knowledge of the world.
All Things Flow
A contemporary of Parmenides was Heraditus (c. 540-480 B.C.),
who was from Ephesus in Asia Minor. He thought that constant
change, or flow, was in fact the mosf basic characteristic of nature.
We could perhaps say that Heraclitus had more faith in what he
could perceive than Parmenides did.
“Everything flows,” said Heraclitus. Everything is in constant
flux and movement, nothing is abiding. Therefore we “cannot step
twice into the same river.” When I step into the river for the second
time, neither I nor the river are the same.
Heraclitus pointed out that the world is characterized by
opposites. If we were never ill, we would not know what it was to
be well. If we never knew hunger, we would take no pleasure in
being full. If there were never any war, we would not appreciate
peace. And if there were no winter, we would never see the spring.
Both good and bad have their inevitable place in the order of
things, Heraclitus believed.
Without this constant interplay of opposites the world would
cease to exist.
“God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace,
hunger and satiety,” he said.
He used the term “God,” but he was clearly not referring to the
gods of the mythology. To Heraclitus, God—or the Deity—was
something that embraced the whole world. Indeed, God can be seen
most clearly in the constant transformations and contrasts of nature.
Instead of the term “God,” Heraclitus often used the Greek
word logos, meaning reason. Although we humans do not always
think alike or have the same degree of reason, Heraclitus believed
that there must be a kind of “universal reason” guiding everything
that happens in nature.
This “universal reason” or “universal law” is something
common to us all, and something that everybody is guided by. And 
36
yet most people live by their individual reason, thought Heraclitus.
In general, he despised his fellow beings. “The opinions of most
people,” he said, “are like the playthings of infants.”
So in the midst of all nature’s constant flux and opposites,
Heraclitus saw an Entity or one-ness. This “something,” which was
the source of everything, he called God or logos.
Four Basic Elements
In one way, Parmenides and Heraclitus were the direct opposite of
each other.
Parmenides’ reason made it clear that nothing could change.
Heraclitus’ sense perceptions made it equally clear that nature was
in a constant state of change. Which of them was right? Should we
let reason dictate or should we rely on our senses?
Parmenides and Heraclitus both say two things: Parmenides
says:
a. that nothing can change, and
b. that our sensory perceptions must therefore be unreliable.
Heraclitus, on the other hand, says:
a. that everything changes (“all things flow”), and
b. that our sensory perceptions are reliable.
Philosophers could hardly disagree more than that! But who was
right? It fell to Empedocles (c. 490-430 B.C.) from Sicily to lead the
way out of the tangle they had gotten themselves into.
He thought they were both right in one of their assertions but
wrong in the other.
Empedocles found that the cause of their basic disagreement
was that both philosophers had assumed the presence of only one
element. If this were true, the gap between what reason dictates and
what “we can see with our own eyes” would be unbridgeable.
Water obviously cannot turn into a fish or a butterfly. In fact,
water cannot change. Pure water will continue to be pure water. So
Parmenides was right in holding that “nothing changes.”
But at the same time Empedocles agreed with Heraclitus that
we must trust the evidence of our senses. We must believe what we 
37
see, and what we see is precisely that nature changes.
Empedocles concluded that it was the idea of a single basic
substance that had to be rejected. Neither water nor air alone can
change into a rosebush or a butterfly. The source of nature cannot
possibly be one single “element.”
Empedocles believed that all in all, nature consisted of four
elements, or “roots” as he termed them. These four roots were
earth, air, fire, and water.
All natural processes were due to the coming together and
separating of these four elements. For all things were a
mixture of earth, air, fire, and water, but in varying
proportions. When a flower or an animal dies, he said, the
four elements separate again. We can register these changes
with the naked eye. But earth and air, fire and water remain
everlasting, “untouched” by all the compounds of which they
are part. So it is not correct to say that “everything” changes.
Basically, nothing changes. What happens is that the four
elements are combined and separated—only to be combined
again.
We can make a comparison to painting. If a painter only
has one color—red, for instance—he cannot paint green
trees. But if he has yellow, red, blue, and black, he can paint
in hundreds of different colors because he can mix them in
varying proportions.
An example from the kitchen illustrates the same thing. If
I only have flour, I have to be a wizard to bake a cake. But if
I have eggs, flour, milk, and sugar, then I can make any
number of different cakes.
It was not purely by chance that Empedocles chose earth,
air, fire, and water as nature’s “roots.” Other philosophers
before him had tried to show that the primordial substance
had to be either water, air, or fire. Thales and Anaximenes
38
had pointed out that both water and air were essential elements
in the physical world. The Greeks believed that fire was also
essential. They observed, for example, the importance of the
sun to all living things, and they also knew that both animals
and humans have body heat.
Empedocles might have watched a piece of wood burning.
Something disintegrates. We hear it crackle and splutter. That is
“water.” Something goes up in smoke. That is “air.” The “fire” we
can see. Something also remains when the fire is extinguished. That
is the ashes—or “earth.”
After Empedocles’ clarification of nature’s transformations as
the combination and dissolution of the four “roots,” something still
remained to be explained. What makes these elements combine so
that new life can occur? And what makes the “mixture” of, say, a
flower dissolve again?
Empedocles believed that there were two different forces at
work in nature. He called them love and strife. Love binds things
together, and strife separates them.
He distinguishes between “substance” and “force.” This is
worth noting. Even today, scientists distinguish between elements
and natural forces. Modern science holds that all natural processes
can be explained as the interaction between different elements and
various natural forces.
Empedocles also raised the question of what happens when we
perceive something.
How can I “see” a flower, for example? What is it that happens?
Have you ever thought about it, Sophie?
Empedocles believed that the eyes consist of earth, air, fire, and
water, just like everything else in nature. So the “earth” in my eye
perceives what is of the earth in my surroundings, the “air” perceives
what is of the air, the “fire” perceives what is of fire, and the “water”
what is of water. Had my eyes lacked any of the four substances, I
would not have seen all of nature.
Something of Everything in Everything
Anaxagoras (500-428 B.C.) was another philosopher who could not 
39
agree that one particular basic substance—water, for instance—
might be transformed into everything we see in the natural world.
Nor could he accept that earth, air, fire, and water can be
transformed into blood and bone.
Anaxagoras held that nature is built up of an infinite number of
minute particles invisible to the eye. Moreover, everything can be
divided into even smaller parts, but even in the minutest parts there
are fragments of all other things. If skin and bone are not a
transformation of something else, there must also be skin and bone,
he thought, in the milk we drink and the food we eat. ~~
A couple of present-day examples can perhaps illustrate
Anaxagoras’ line of thinking.
Modern laser technology can produce so-called holograms. If
one of these holograms depicts a car, for example, and the hologram
is fragmented, we will see a picture of the whole car even though we
only have the part of the hologram that showed the bumper. This is
because the whole subject is present in every tiny part.
In a sense, our bodies are built up in the same way. If I loosen
a skin cell from my finger, the nucleus will contain not only the
characteristics of my skin: the same cell will also reveal what kind
of eyes I have, the color of my hair, the number and type of my
fingers, and so on. Every cell of the human body carries a blueprint
of the way all the other cells are constructed. So there is “something
of everything” in every single cell. The whole exists in each tiny
part.
Anaxagoras called these minuscule particles which have
something of everything in them seeds.
Remember that Empedocles thought that it was “love” that
joined the elements together in whole bodies. Anaxagoras also
imagined “order” as a kind of force, creating animals and humans,
flowers and trees. He called this force mind or intelligence (nous).
Anaxagoras is also interesting because he was the first
philosopher we hear of in Athens.
He was from Asia Minor but he moved to Athens at the age of
forty. He was later accused of atheism and was ultimately forced to
leave the city. Among other things, he said that the sun was not a
god but a red-hot stone, bigger than the entire Peloponnesian
40
peninsula.
Anaxagoras was generally very interested in astronomy. He
believed that all heavenly bodies were made of the same substance
as Earth. He reached this conclusion after studying a meteorite. This
gave him the idea that there could be human life on other planets.
He also pointed out that the Moon has no light of its own—its light
comes from Earth, he said. He thought up an explanation for solar
eclipses as well.
P.S. Thank you for your attention, Sophie. It is not unlikely that
you will need to read this chapter two or three times before you
understand it all. But understanding will always require some effort.
You probably wouldn’t admire a friend who was good at everything
if it cost her no effort.
The best solution to the question of basic substance and the
transformations in nature must wait until tomorrow, when you will
meet Democritus. I’ll say no more!
Sophie sat in the den looking out into the garden through a little
hole in the dense thicket. She had to try and sort out her thoughts
after all she had read.
It was as clear as daylight that plain water could never turn into
anything other than ice or steam.
Water couldn’t even turn into a watermelon, because even
watermelons consisted of more than just water. But she was only
sure of that because that’s what she had learned. Would she be
absolutely certain, for example, that ice was only water if that wasn’t
what she had learned? At least, she would have to have studied very
closely how water froze to ice and melted again.
Sophie tried once again to use her own common sense, and not
to think about what she had learned from others.
Parmenides had refused to accept the idea of change in any
form. And the more she thought about it, the more she was
convinced that, in a way, he had been right. His intelligence could
not accept that “something” could suddenly transform itself into
“something completely different.” It must have taken quite a bit of
courage to come right out and say it, because it meant denying all
the natural changes that people could see for themselves. Lots of 
41
people must have laughed at him.
And Empedocles must have been pretty smart too, when he
proved that the world had to consist of more than one single
substance. That made all the transformations of nature possible
without anything actually changing.
The old Greek philosopher had found that out just by reasoning.
Of course he had studied nature, but he didn’t have the equipment
to do chemical analysis the way scientists do nowadays.
Sophie was not sure whether she really believed that the source
of everything actually was earth, air, fire, and water. But after all,
what did that matter? In principle, Empedocles was right. The only
way we can accept the transformations we can see with our own
eyes—without losing our reason—is to admit the existence of more
than one single basic substance.
Sophie found philosophy doubly exciting because she was able
to follow all the ideas by using her own common sense—without
having to remember everything she had learned at school. She
decided that philosophy was not something you can learn; but
perhaps you can learn to think philosophically.
42
Democritus
…the most ingenious toy in the world…
Sophie put all the typed pages from the unknown philosopher back
into the cookie tin and put the lid on it. She crawled out of the den
and stood for a while looking across the garden. She thought about
what happened yesterday. Her mother had teased her about the “love
letter” again at breakfast this morning. She walked quickly over to
the mailbox to prevent the same thing from happening today.
Getting a love letter two days in a row would be doubly
embarrassing.
There was another little white envelope! Sophie began to
discern a pattern in the deliveries: every afternoon she would find a
big brown envelope. While she read the contents, the philosopher
would sneak up to the mailbox with another little white envelope.
So now Sophie would be able to find out who he was. If it was
a he! She had a good view of the mailbox from her room. If she
stood at the window she would see the mysterious philosopher.
White envelopes don’t just appear out of thin air!
Sophie decided to keep a careful watch the following day.
Tomorrow was Friday and she would have the whole weekend
ahead of her.
She went up to her room and opened the envelope. There was
only one question today, but it was even dumber than the previous
three:
Why is Lego the most ingenious toy in the world?
For a start, Sophie was not at all sure she agreed that it was. It
was years since she had played with the little plastic blocks.
Moreover she could not for the life of her see what Lego could
possibly have to do with philosophy.
But she was a dutiful student. Rummaging on the top shelf of
her closet, she found a bag full of Lego blocks of all shapes and
sizes.
For the first time in ages she began to build with them. As she
worked, some ideas began to occur to her about the blocks.
43
They are easy to assemble, she thought. Even though they are
all different, they all fit together.
They are also unbreakable. She couldn’t ever remember having
seen a broken Lego block. All her blocks looked as bright and new
as the day they were bought, many years ago. The best thing about
them was that with Lego she could construct any kind of object. And
then she could separate the blocks and construct something new.
What more could one ask of a toy? Sophie decided that Lego
really could be called the most ingenious toy in the world. But what
it had to do with philosophy was beyond her.
She had nearly finished constructing a big doll’s house. Much
as she hated to admit it, she hadn’t had as much fun in ages.
Why did people quit playing when they grew up?
When her mother got home and saw what Sophie had been
doing, she blurted out, “What fun! I’m so glad you’re not too grown
up to play!”
“I’m not playing!” Sophie retorted indignantly, “I’m doing a
very complicated philosophical experiment!”
Her mother sighed deeply. She was probably thinking about the
white rabbit and the top hat.
When Sophie got home from school the following day, there
were several more pages for her in a big brown envelope. She took
them upstairs to her room. She could not wait to read them, but she
had to keep her eye on the mailbox at the same time.
THE ATOM THEORY
Here I am again, Sophie. Today you are going to hear about the
last of the great natural philosophers. His name is Democritus (c.
460-370 B.C.) and he was from the little town of Abdera on the
northern Aegean coast.
If you were able to answer the question about Lego blocks
without difficulty, you should have no problem understanding what
this philosopher’s project was.
Democritus agreed with his predecessors that transformations
in nature could not be due to the fact that anything actually
“changed.” He therefore assumed that everything was built up of 
44
tiny invisible blocks, each of which was eternal and immutable.
Democritus called these smallest units atoms.
The word “a-tom” means “un-cuttable.” For Democritus it was
all-important to establish that the constituent parts that everything
else was composed of could not be divided indefinitely into smaller
parts. If this were possible, they could not be used as blocks. If atoms
could eternally be broken down into ever smaller parts, nature would
begin to dissolve like constantly diluted soup.
Moreover, nature’s blocks had to be eternal—because nothing
can come from nothing. In this, he agreed with Parmenides and the
Eleatics. Also, he believed that all atoms were firm and solid. But
they could not all be the same. If all atoms were identical, there
would still be no satisfactory explanation of how they could
combine to form everything from poppies and olive trees to goatskin
and human hair.
Democritus believed that nature consisted of an unlimited
number and variety of atoms. Some were round and smooth, others
were irregular and jagged. And precisely because they were so
different they could join together into all kinds of different bodies.
But however infinite they might be in number and shape, they were
all eternal, immutable, and indivisible.
When a body—a tree or an animal, for instance—died and
disintegrated, the atoms dispersed and could be used again in new
bodies. Atoms moved around in space, but because they had
“hooks” and “barbs,” they could join together to form all the things
we see around us.
So now you see what I meant about Lego blocks. They have
more or less the same properties as those which Democritus ascribed
to atoms. And that is what makes them so much fun to build with.
They are first and foremost indivisible. Then they have different
shapes and sizes. They are solid and impermeable. They also have
“hooks” and “barbs” so that they can be connected to form every
conceivable figure. These connections can later be broken again so
that new figures can be constructed from the same blocks.
The fact that they can be used over and over is what has made
Lego so popular. Each single Lego block can be part of a truck one
day and part of a castle the day after. We could also say that lego 
45
blocks are “eternal.” Children of today can play with the same
blocks their parents played with when they were little.
We can form things out of clay too, but clay cannot be used
over and over, because it can be broken up into smaller and smaller
pieces. These tiny pieces can never be joined together again to make
something else.
Today we can establish that Democritus’ atom theory was more
or less correct. Nature really is built up of different “atoms” that join
and separate again. A hydrogen atom in a cell at the end of my nose
was once part of an elephant’s trunk. A carbon atom in my cardiac
muscle was once in the tail of a dinosaur.
In our own time, however, scientists have discovered that
atoms can be broken into smaller “elemental particles.” We call
these elemental particles protons, neutrons, and electrons. These
will possibly someday be broken into even lesser particles. But
physicists agree thatsomewhere along the line there hasto be a limit.
There has to be a “minimal part” of which nature consists.
Democritus did not have access to modern electronic apparatus.
His only proper equipment was his mind. But reason left him no real
choice. Once it is accepted that nothing can change, that nothing can
come out of nothing, and that nothing is ever lost, then nature must
consist of infinitesimal blocks that can join and separate again.
Democritus did not believe in any “force” or “soul” that could
intervene in natural processes. The only things that existed, he
believed, were atoms and the void. Since he believed in nothing but
material things, we call him a materialist.
According to Democritus, there is no conscious “design” in the
movement of atoms. In nature, everything happens quite
mechanically. This does not mean that everything happens
randomly, for everything obeys the inevitable laws of necessity.
Everything that happens has a natural cause, a cause that is inherent
in the thing itself. Democritus once said that he would rather
discover a new cause of nature than be the King of Persia.
The atom theory also explains our sense perception, thought
Democritus. When we sense something, it is due to the movement
of atoms in space. When I see the moon, it is because “moon atoms”
penetrate my eye.
46
But what about the “soul,” then? Surely that could not consist
of atoms, of material things? Indeed it could. Democritus believed
that the soul was made up of special round, smooth “soul atoms.”
When a human being died, the soul atoms flew in all directions, and
could then become part of a new soul formation.
This meant that human beings had no immortal soul, another
belief that many people share today. They believe, like Democritus,
that “soul” is connected with brain, and that we cannot have any
form of consciousness once the brain disintegrates.
Democritus’s atom theory marked the end of Greek natural
philosophy for the time being. He agreed with Heraclitus that
everything in nature “flowed,” since forms come and go. But behind
everything that flowed there were some eternal and immutable
things that did not flow. Democritus called them atoms.
During her reading Sophie glanced out of the window several
times to see whether her mysterious correspondent had turned up at
the mailbox. Now she just sat staring down the road, thinking about
what she had read. She felt that Democritus’s ideas had been so
simple and yet so ingenious. He had discovered the real solution to
the problem of “basic substance” and “transformation.” This
problem had been so complicated that philosophers had gone around
puzzling over it for generations. And in the end Democritus had
solved it on his own by using his common sense.
Sophie could hardly help smiling. It had to be true that nature
was built up of small parts that never changed. At the same time
Heraclitus was obviously right in thinking that all forms in nature
“flow.” Because everybody dies, animals die, even a mountain range
slowly disintegrates. The point was that the mountain range is made
up of tiny indivisible parts that never break up.
At the same time Democritus had raised some new questions.
For example, he had said that everything happened mechanically.
He did not accept that there was any spiritual force in life—unlike
Empedocles and Anaxagoras. Democritus also believed that man
had no immortal soul.
Could she be sure of that?
She didn’t know. But then she had only just begun the
philosophy course.
47
FATE
…the “fortune-teller” is trying to foresee something that is
really quite unforeseeable ...
Sophie had been keeping her eye on the mailbox while she read
about Democritus. But just in case, she decided nevertheless to take
a stroll down to the garden gate.
When she opened the front door she saw a small envelope on
the front step. And sure enough—it was addressed to Sophie
Amundsen.
So he had tricked her! Today of all days, when she had kept
such careful watch on the mailbox, the mystery man had sneaked up
to the house from a different angle and just laid the letter on the step
before making off into the woods again. Drat!
How did he know that Sophie was watching the mailbox today?
Had he seen her at the window?
Anyway, she was glad to find the letter before her mother
arrived.
Sophie went back to her room and opened the letter. The white
envelope was a bit wet around the edges, and had two little holes in
it. Why was that? It had not rained for several days.
The little note inside read:
Do you believe in Fate?
Is sickness the punishment of the gods? What forces govern the
course of history?
Did she believe in Fate? She was not at all sure. But she knew
a lot of people who did. There was a girl in her class who read
horoscopes in magazines. But if they believed in astrology, they
probably believed in Fate as well, because astrologers claimed that
the position of the stars influenced people’s lives on Earth.
If you believed that a black cat crossing your path meant bad
luck—well, then you believed in Fate, didn’t you? As she thought
about it, several more examples of fatalism occurred to her. Why do 
48
so many people knock on wood, for example? And why was Friday
the thirteenth an unlucky day? Sophie had heard that lots of hotels
had no room number 13. It had to be because so many people were
superstitious.
“Superstitious.” What a strange word. If you believed in
Christianity or Islam, it was called “faith.” But if you believed in
astrology or Friday the thirteenth it was superstition! Who had the
right to call other people’s belief superstition?
Sophie was sure of one thing, though. Democritus had not
believed in fate. He was a materialist.
He had only believed in atoms and empty space.
Sophie tried to think about the other questions on the note.
“Is sickness the punishment of the gods?” Surely nobody
believed that nowadays? But it occurred to her that many people
thought it helped to pray for recovery, so at any rate they must
believe that God had some power over people’s health.
The last question was harder to answer. Sophie had never given
much thought to what governed the course of history. It had to be
people, surely? If it was God or Fate, people had no free will.
The idea of free will made Sophie think of something else. Why
should she put up with this mysterious philosopher playing cat and
mouse with her? Why couldn’t she write a letter to him. He (or she)
would quite probably put another big envelope in the mailbox during
the night or sometime tomorrow morning. She would see to it that
there was a letter ready for this person.
Sophie began right away. It was difficult to write to someone
she had never seen. She didn’t even know if it was a man or a
woman. Or if he or she was old or young. For that matter, the
mysterious philosopher could even be someone she already knew.
She wrote:
Most respected philosopher, Your generous correspondence
course in philosophy is greatly appreciated by us here. But it bothers
us not to know who you are. We therefore request you to use your
full name. In return we would like to extend our hospitality should
you care to corne and have coffee with us, but preferably when my
mother is at home. She is at work from 7:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day
from Monday to Friday. I am at school during these days, but I am 
49
always home by 2:15 p.m., except on Thursdays. I am also very
good at making coffee.
Thanking you in advance, I remain
Your attentive student,
Sophie Amundsen (aged 14)
At the bottom of the page she wrote RSVP.
Sophie felt that the letter had turned out much too formal. But
it was hard to know which words to choose when writing to a person
without a face. She put the letter in a pink envelope and addressed it
“To the philosopher.”
The problem was where to put it so her mother didn’t find it.
She would have to wait for her to get home before putting it in the
mailbox. And she would also have to remember to look in the
mailbox early the next morning before the newspaper arrived. If no
new letter came for her this evening or during the night, she would
have to take the pink envelope in again.
Why did it all have to be so complicated?
That evening Sophie went up to her room early, even though it
was Friday. Her mother tried to tempt her with pizza and a thriller
on TV, but Sophie said she was tired and wanted to go to bed and
read. While her mother sat watching TV, she sneaked out to the
mailbox with her letter.
Her mother was clearly worried. She had started speaking to
Sophie in a different tone since the business with the white rabbit
and the top hat. Sophie hated to be a worry to her mother, but she
just had to go upstairs and keep an eye on the mailbox.
When her mother came up at about eleven o’clock, Sophie was
sitting at the window staring down the road.
“You’re not still sitting there staring at the mailbox!” she said.
“I can look at whatever I like.”
“I really think you must be in love, Sophie. But if he is going
to bring you another letter, he certainly won’t come in the middle of
the night.”
Yuck! Sophie loathed all that soppy talk about love. But she
had to let her mother go on believing it was true.
50
“Is he the one who told you about the rabbit and the top hat?”
her mother asked. Sophie nodded.
“He—he doesn’t do drugs, does he?”
Now Sophie felt really sorry for her mother. She couldn’t go
on letting her worry this way, although it was completely nutty of
her to think that just because someone had a slightly bizarre idea he
must be on something. Grownups really were idiotic sometimes.
She said, “Mom, I promise you once and for all I’ll never do
any of that stuff... and he doesn’t either. But he is very interested in
philosophy.”
“Is he older than you?” Sophie shook her head. “The same
age?” Sophie nodded.
“Well, I’m sure he’s very sweet, darling. Now I think you
should try and get some sleep.”
But Sophie stayed sitting by the window for what seemed like
hours. At last she could hardly keep her eyes open. It was one
o’clock.
She was just about to go to bed when she suddenly caught sight
of a shadow emerging from the woods.
Although it was almost dark outside, she could make out the
shape of a human figure. It was a man, and Sophie thought he looked
quite old. He was certainly not her age! He was wearing a beret of
some kind.
She could have sworn he glanced up at the house, but Sophie’s
light was not on. The man went straight up to the mailbox and
dropped a big envelope into it. As he let go of it, he caught sight of
Sophie’s letter. He reached down into the mailbox and fished it up.
The next minute he was walking swiftly back toward the woods. He
hurried down the woodland path and was gone.
Sophie felt her heart pounding. Her first instinct was to run after
him in her pajamas but she didn’t dare run after a stranger in the
middle of the night. But she did have to go out and fetch the
envelope.
After a minute or two she crept down the stairs, opened the
front door quietly, and ran to the mailbox. In a flash she was back in
her room with the envelope in her hand. She sat on her bed, holding
her breath. After a few minutes had passed and all was still quiet in 
51
the house, she opened the letter and began to read.
She knew this would not be an answer to her own letter. That
could not arrive until tomorrow.
FATE
Good morning once again, my dear Sophie. In case you should get
any ideas, let me make it quite clear that you must never attempt to
check up on me. One day we will meet, but I shall be the one to
decide when and where. And that’s final. You are not going to
disobey me, are you?
But to return to the philosophers. We have seen how they tried
to find natural explanations for the transformations in Nature.
Previously these things had been explained through myths.
Old superstitions had to be cleared away in other areas as well.
We see them at work in matters of sickness and health as well as in
political events. In both these areas the Greeks were great believers
in fatalism.
Fatalism is the belief that whatever happens is predestined. We
find this belief all over the world, not only throughout history but in
our own day as welt. Here in the Nordic countries we find a strong
belief in “lagnadan,” or fate, in the old Icelandic sagas of the Edda.
We also find the belief, both in Ancient Greece and in other
parts of the world, that people could learn their fate from some form
of oracle. In other words, that the fate of a person or a country could
be foreseen in various ways.
There are still a lot of people who believe that they can tell your
fortune in the cards, read your palm, or predict your future in the
stars.
A special Norwegian version of this is telling your fortune in
coffee cups. When a coffee cup is empty there are usually some
traces of coffee grounds left. These might form a certain image or
pattern—at least, if we give our imagination free rein. If the grounds
resemble a car, it might mean that the person who drank from the
cup is going for a long drive.
Thus the “fortune-teller” is trying to foresee something that is
really quite unforeseeable. This is characteristic of all forms of 
52
foreseeing. And precisely because what they “see” is so vague, it is
hard to repudiate fortune-tellers’ claims.
When we gaze up at the stars, we see a veritable chaos of
twinkling dots. Nevertheless, throughout the ages there have always
been people who believed that the stars could tell us something
about our life on Earth. Even today there are political leaders who
seek the advice of astrologers before they make any important
decisions.
The Oracle at Delphi
The ancient Greeks believed that they could consult the famous
oracle at Delphi about their fate. Apollo, the god of the oracle, spoke
through his priestess Pythia, who sat on a stool over a fissure in the
earth, from which arose hypnotic vapors that put Pythia in a trance.
This enabled her to be Apollo’s mouthpiece. When people came to
Delphi they had to present their question to the priests of the oracle,
who passed it on to Pythia. Her answer would be so obscure or
ambiguous that the priests would have to interpret it. In that way,
the people got the benefit of Apollo’s wisdom, believing that e knew
everything, even about the future.
There were many heads of state who dared not go to war or take
other decisive steps until they had consulted the oracle at Delphi.
The priests of Apollo thus functioned more or less as diplomats, or
advisers. They were experts with an intimate knowledge of the
people and the country.
Over the entrance to the temple at Delphi was a famous
inscription: KNOW THYSELF! It reminded visitors that man must
never believe himself to be more than mortal—and that no man can
escape his destiny.
The Greeks had many stories of people whose destiny catches
up with them. Astime went by, a number of plays—tragedies—were
written about these “tragic” people. The most famous one is the
tragedy of King Oedipus.
History and Medicine
But Fate did not just govern the lives of individuals. The Greeks 
53
believed that even world history was governed by Fate, and that the
fortunes of war could be swayed by the intervention of the gods.
Today there are still many people who believe that God or some
other mysterious power is steering the course of history.
But at the same time as Greek philosophers were trying to find
natural explanations for the processes of nature, the first historians
were beginning to search for natural explanations for the course of
history. When a country lost a war, the vengeance of the gods was
no longer an acceptable explanation to them. The best known Greek
historians were Herodotus (484- 424 B.C.) and Thucydides (460-
400 B.C.).
The Greeks also believed that sickness could be ascribed to
divine intervention. On the other hand, the gods could make people
well again if they made the appropriate sacrifices.
This idea was in no way unique to the Greeks. Before the
development of modern medicine, the most widely accepted view
was that sickness was due to supernatural causes. The word
“influenza” actually means a malign influence from the stars.
Even today, there are a lot of people who believe that some
diseases—AIDS, for example—are God’s punishment. Many also
believe that sick people can be cured with the help of the
supernatural.
Concurrently with the new directions in Greek philosophy, a
Greek medical science arose which tried to find natural explanations
for sickness and health. The founder of Greek medicine is said to
have been Hippocrates, who was born on the island of Cos around
460 B.C.
The most essential safeguards against sickness, according to
the Hippocratic medical tradition, were moderation and a healthy
lifestyle. Health is the natural condition. When sickness occurs, it is
a sign that Nature has gone off course because of physical or mental
imbalance. The road to health for everyone is through moderation,
harmony, and a “sound mind in a sound body.”
There is a lot of talk today about “medical ethics,” which is
another way of saying that a doctor must practice medicine
according to certain ethical rules. For instance, a doctor may not give
healthy people a prescription for narcotics. A doctor must also 
54
maintain professional secrecy, which means that he is not allowed
to reveal anything a patient has told him about his illness. These
ideas go back to Hippocrates. He required his pupils to take the
following oath:
I will follow that system or regimen which, according to my
ability and judgment, I consider to be for the benefit of my
patients, and abstain from whatever is deleterious and
mischievous. 1 will give no deadly medicine to anyone if asked
nor suggest any such counsel, and in like manner I will not give
to a woman the means to produce an abortion. Whenever I go
into a house, I will go for the benefit of the sick and will abstain
from every voluntary act of mischief and corruption, and
further, from the seduction of females or males, whether
freemen or slaves. Whatever, in connection with my
professional practice, I see or hear which ought not to be
spoken abroad, I will keep secret. So long as I continue to carry
out this oath unviolated, may it be granted to me to enjoy life
and the practice of the art, respected by all men in all times, but
should I violate this oath, may the reverse be my lot.
Sophie awoke with a start on Saturday morning. Was it a dream or
had she really seen the philosopher?
She felt under the bed with one hand. Yes—there lay the letter
that had come during the night. It wasn’t only a dream.
She had definitely seen the philosopher! And what’s more, with
her own eyes she had seen him take her letter!
She crouched down on the floor and pulled out all the
typewritten pages from under the bed. But what was that? Right by
the wall there was something red. A scarf, perhaps?
Sophie edged herself in under the bed and pulled out a red silk
scarf. It wasn’t hers, that was for sure!
She examined it more closely and gasped when she saw HILDE
written in ink along the seam.
Hilde! But who was Hilde? How could their paths keep
crossing like this?
56
SOCRATES
... wisest is she who know she does not know…
Sophie put on a summer dress and hurried down to the kitchen. Her
mother was standing by the kitchen table. Sophie decided not to say
anything about the silk scarf.
“Did you bring in the newspaper?” she asked. Her mother
turned.
“Would you get it for me?”
Sophie was out of the door in a flash, down the gravel path to
the mailbox.
Only the newspaper. She couldn’t expect an answer so soon,
she supposed. On the front page of the paper she read something
about the Norwegian UN battalion in Lebanon.
The UN battalion ... wasn’t that the postmark on the card from
Hilde’s father? But the postage stamp had been Norwegian. Maybe
the Norwegian UN soldiers had their own post office with them.
“You’ve become very interested in the newspaper,” said her
mother drily when Sophie returned to the kitchen.
Luckily her mother said no more about mailboxes and stuff,
either during breakfast or later on that day. When she went shopping,
Sophie took her letter about Fate down to the den.
She was surprised to see a little white envelope beside the
cookie tin with the other letters from the philosopher. Sophie was
quite sure she had not put it there.
This envelope was also wet around the edges. And it had a
couple of deep holes in it, just like the one she had received
yesterday.
Had the philosopher been here? Did he know about her secret
hiding place? Why was the envelope wet?
All these questions made her head spin. She opened the letter
and read the note:
Dear Sophie,
I read your letter with great interest—and not without
some regret. I must unfortunately disappoint you with regard to 
57
the invitation. We shall meet one day, but it will probably be
quite a while before I can come in person to Captain’s Bend.I
must add that from now on I will no longer be able to deliver
the letters personally. It would be much too risky in the long
run. In the future, letters will be delivered by my little
messenger. On the other hand, they will be brought directly to
the secret place in the garden.
You may continue to contact me whenever you feel the
need. When you do, put a pink envelope out with a cookie or a
lump of sugar in it. When the messenger finds it, he will bring
it straight to me.
P.S. It is not pleasant to decline a young lady’s invitation
to coffee, but sometimes it is a matter of necessity.
P.P.S. If you should come across a red silk scarf anywhere,
please take care of it. Sometimes personal property gets mixed
up. Especially at school and places like that, and this is a
philosophy school.
Yours, Alberto Knox
Sophie had lived for almost fifteen years, and had received quite a
lot of letters in her young life, at least at Christmas and on birthdays.
But this letter was the strangest one she had ever received.
It had no postage stamp. It hadn’t even been put in the mailbox.
It had been brought straight to Sophie’s top-secret hideout in the old
hedge. The fact that it was wet in the dry spring weather was also
most mystifying.
The strangest thing of all was the silk scarf, of course. The
philosopher must have another pupil.
That was it. And this other pupil had lost a red silk scarf. Right.
But how had she managed to lose it under Sophie’s bed?
And Alberto Knox … what kind of a name was that?
One thing was confirmed—the connection between the
philosopher and Hilde Moller Knag. But that Hilde’s own father was
now confusing their addresses—that was completely
incomprehensible.
Sophie sat for a long time thinking about what connection there
could possibly be between Hilde and herself. Finally she gave up. 
58
The philosopher had written that she would meet him one day.
Perhaps she would meet Hilde too.
She turned the letter over. She now saw that there were some
sentences written on the back as well:
Is there such a there such a thing as natural modesty?
Wisest is she who knows she does not know...
True insight comes from within.
He who knows what is right will do right.
Sophie knew that the short sentences that came in the white
envelopes were intended to prepare her for the next big envelope,
which would arrive shortly thereafter. She suddenly had an idea. If
the “messenger” came to the den to deliver a brown envelope,
Sophie could simply sit and wait for him. Or was it a her? She would
definitely hang on to whoever it was until he or she told her more
about the philosopher! The letter said that the “messenger” was
little. Could it be a child? “Is there such a thing as natural modesty?”
Sophie knew that “modesty” was an old-fashioned word for
shyness—for example, about being seen naked. But was it really
natural to be embarrassed about that? If something was natural, she
supposed, it was the same for everybody. In many parts of the world
it was completely natural to be naked. So it must be society that
decides what you can and can’t do. When Grandma was young you
certainly couldn’t sunbathe topless. But today, most people think it
is “natural,” even though it is still strictly forbidden in lots of
countries. Was this philosophy? Sophie wondered.
The next sentence was: “Wisest is she who knows she does not
know.”
Wiser than who? If the philosopher meant that someone who
realized that she didn’t know everything under the sun was wiser
than someone who knew just a little, but who thought she knew a
whole lot—well, that wasn’t so difficult to agree with. Sophie had
never thought about it before. But the more she did, the more clearly
she saw that knowing what you don’t know is also a kind of
knowledge. The stupidest thing she knew was for people to act like
they knew all about things they knew absolutely nothing about.
59
The next sentence was about true insight coming from within.
But didn’t all knowledge come into people’s heads from the outside?
On the other hand, Sophie could remember situations when her
mother or the teachers at school had tried to teach her something that
she hadn’t been receptive to. And whenever she had really learned
something, it was when she had somehow contributed to it herself.
Now and then, even, she would suddenly understand a thing she’d
drawn a total blank on before. That was probably what people meant
by “insight.”
So far, so good. Sophie thought she had done reasonably well
on the first three questions. But the next statement was so odd she
couldn’t help smiling: “He who knows what is right will do right.”
Did that mean that when a bank robber robbed a bank it was
because he didn’t know any better?
Sophie didn’t think so.
On the contrary, she thought that both children and adults did
stupid things that they probably regretted afterwards, precisely
because they had done them against their better judgment.
While she sat thinking, she heard something rustling in the dry
undergrowth on the other side of the hedge nearest the woods. Could
it be the messenger? Her heart started beating faster. It sounded like
a panting animal was coming.
The next moment a big Labrador pushed its way into the
den. In its mouth it held a big brown envelope which it dropped at
Sophie’s feet. It all happened so quickly that Sophie had no time to
react. A second later she was sitting with the big envelope in her
hands—and the golden Labrador had scampered off into the woods
again.
60
Once it was all over she reacted. She started to cry. She sat like
that for a while, losing all sense of time. Then she looked up
suddenly.
So that was his famous messenger! Sophie breathed a sigh of
relief. Of course that was why the white envelopes were wet around
the edges and had holes in them. Why hadn’t she thought of it? Now
it made sense to put a cookie or a lump of sugar in the envelope
when she wrote to the philosopher.
She may not always have been as smart as she would like, but
who could have guessed that the messenger was a trained dog! It
was a bit out of the ordinary, to put it mildly! She could certainly
forget all about forcing the messenger to reveal Alberto Knox’s
whereabouts.
Sophie opened the big envelope and began to read.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ATHENS
Dear Sophie, When you read this you may already have met Hermes.
In case you haven’t, I’ll add that he is a dog. But don’t worry. He is
very good-tempered—and moreover, a good deal more intelligent
than a lot of people. In any event he never tries to give the
impression of being cleverer than he is.
You may also note that his name is not without significance.
In Greek mythology, Hermes was the messenger of the gods.
He was also the god of seafarers, but we shall not bother about that,
at least not for the moment. It is more important that Hermes also
gave his name to the word “hermetic,” which means hidden or
inaccessible— not inappropriate for the way Hermes takes care to
keep the two of us hidden from each other.
So the messenger has herewith been introduced. Naturally he
answers to his name and is altogether very well behaved.
But to return to philosophy. We have already completed the
first part of the course. I refer to the natural philosophers and their
decisive break with the mythological world picture. Now we are
going to meet the three great classical philosophers, Socrates, Plato,
and Aristotle.
61
Each in his own way, these philosophers influenced the whole
of European civilization.
The natural philosophers are also called the pre-Socratics,
because they lived before Socrates. Although Democritus died some
years after Socrates, all his ideas belong to pre- Socratic natural
philosophy. Socrates represents a new era, geographically as well as
temporally. He was the first of the great philosophers to be born in
Athens, and both he and his two successors lived and worked there.
You may recall that Anaxagoras also lived in Athens for a while but
was hounded out because he said the sun was a red-hot stone.
(Socrates fared no better!)
From the time of Socrates, Athens was the center of Greek
culture. It is also important to note the change of character in the
philosophical project itself as it progresses from natural philosophy
to Socrates. But before we meet Socrates, let us hear a little about
the so-called Sophists, who dominated the Athenian scene at the
time of Socrates.
Curtain up, Sophie! The history of ideas is like a drama in many
acts.
Man at the Center
After about 450 B.C., Athens was the cultural center of the
Greek world. From this time on, philosophy took a new direction.
The natural philosophers had been mainly concerned with the nature
of the physical world. This gives them a central position in the
history of science. In Athens, interest was now focused on the
individual and the individual’s place in society.
Gradually a democracy evolved, with popular assemblies and
courts of law.
In order for democracy to work, people had to be educated
enough to take part in the democratic process. We have seen in our
own time how a young democracy needs popular enlightenment. For
the Athenians, it was first and foremost essential to master the art of
rhetoric, which means saying things in a convincing manner.
A group of itinerant teachers and philosophers from the Greek
colonies flocked to Athens.
62
They called themselves Sophists. The word “sophist” means a
wise and informed person. In Athens, the Sophists made a living out
of teaching the citizens for money.
The Sophists had one characteristic in common with the natural
philosophers: they were critical of the traditional mythology. But at
the same time the Sophists rejected what they regarded as fruitless
philosophical speculation. Their opinion was that although answers
to philosophical questions may exist, man cannot know the truth
about the riddles of nature and of the universe. In philosophy a view
like this is called skepticism.
But even if we cannot know the answers to all of nature’s
riddles, we know that people have to learn to live together. The
Sophists chose to concern themselves with man and his place in
society.
“Man is the measure of all things,” said the Sophist Protagoras
(c. 485-410 B.C.). By that he meant that the question of whether a
thing is right or wrong, good or bad, must always be considered in
relation to a person’s needs. On being asked whether he believed in
the Greek gods, he answered, “The question is complex and life is
short.” A person who is unable to say categorically whether or not
the gods or God exists is called an agnostic.
The Sophists were as a rule men who had traveled widely and
seen different forms of government. Both conventions and local
laws in the city-states could vary widely. This led the Sophists to
raise the question of what was natural and what was socially
induced. By doing this, they paved the way for social criticism in
the city-state of Athens.
They could for example point out that the use of an expression
like “natural modesty” is not always defensible, for if it is “natural”
to be modest, it must be something you are born with, something
innate. But is it really innate, Sophie—or is it socially induced? To
someone who has traveled the world, the answer should be simple:
It is not “natural”—or innate—to be afraid to show yourself naked.
Modesty—or the lack of it—is first and foremost a matter of social
convention.
As you can imagine, the wandering Sophists created bitter 
63
wrangling in Athens by pointing out that there were no absolute
norms for what was right or wrong.
Socrates, on the other hand, tried to show that some such norms
are in fact absolute and universally valid.
Who Was Socrates?
Socrates (470-399 B.C.) is possibly the most enigmatic figure
in the entire history of philosophy. He never wrote a single line. Yet
he is one of the philosophers who has had the greatest influence on
European thought, not least because of the dramatic manner of his
death.
We know he was born in Athens, and that he spent most of his
life in the city squares and marketplaces talking with the people he
met there. “The trees in the countryside can teach me nothing,” he
said. He could also stand lost in thought for hours on end.
Even during his lifetime he was considered somewhat
enigmatic, and fairly soon after his death he was held to be the
founder of any number of different philosophical schools of thought.
The very fact that he was so enigmatic and ambiguous made it
possible for widely differing schools of thought to claim him as their
own.
We know for a certainty that he was extremely ugly. He was
potbellied, and had bulging eyes and a snub nose. But inside he was
said to be “perfectly delightful.” It was also said of him that “You
can seek him in the present, you can seek him in the past, but you
will never find his equal.” Nevertheless he was sentenced to death
for his philosophical activities.
The life of Socrates is mainly known to us through the writings
of Plato, who was one of his pupils and who became one of the
greatest philosophers of all time. Plato wrote a number of Dialogues,
or dramatized discussions on philosophy, in which he uses Socrates
as his principal character and mouthpiece.
Since Plato is putting his own philosophy in Socrates’ mouth,
we cannot be sure that the words he speaks in the dialogues were
ever actually uttered by him. So it is no easy matter to distinguish
between the teachings of Socrates and the philosophy of Plato. 
64
Exactly the same problem applies to many other historical persons
who left no written accounts. The classic example, of course, is
Jesus. We cannot be certain that the “historical” Jesus actually spoke
the words that Matthew or Luke ascribed to him. Similarly, what the
“historical” Socrates actually said will always be shrouded in
mystery.
But who Socrates “really” was is relatively unimportant. It is
Plato’s portrait of Socrates that has inspired thinkers in the Western
world for nearly 2,500 years.
The Art of Discourse
The essential nature of Socrates’ art lay in the fact that he did
not appear to want to instruct people. On the contrary he gave the
impression of one desiring to learn from those he spoke with. So
instead of lecturing like a traditional schoolmaster, he discussed.
Obviously he would not have become a famous philosopher
had he confined himself purely to listening to others. Nor would he
have been sentenced to death. But he just asked questions, especially
to begin a conversation, as if he knew nothing. In the course of the
discussion he would generally get his opponents to recognize the
weakness of their arguments, and, forced into a corner, they would
finally be obliged to realize what was right and what was wrong.
Socrates, whose mother was a midwife, used to say that his art
was like the art of the midwife. She does not herself give birth to the
child, but she is there to help during its delivery. Similarly, Socrates
saw his task as helping people to “give birth” to the correct insight,
since real understanding must come from within. It cannot be
imparted by someone else. And only the understanding that comes
from within can lead to true insight.
Let me put it more precisely: The ability to give birth is a
natural characteristic. In the same way, everybody can grasp
philosophical truths if they just use their innate reason. Using your
innate reason means reaching down inside yourself and using what
is there.
By playing ignorant, Socrates forced the people he met to use
their common sense.
65
Socrates could feign ignorance—or pretend to be dumber than
he was. We call this Socratic irony. This enabled him to continually
expose the weaknesses in people’s thinking. He was not averse to
doing this in the middle of the city square. If you met Socrates, you
thus might end up being made a fool of publicly.
So it is not surprising that, as time went by, people found him
increasingly exasperating, especially people who had status in the
community. “Athens is like a sluggish horse,” he is reputed to have
said, “and I am the gadfly trying to sting it into life.”
(What do we do with gadflies, Sophie?)
A Divine Voice
It was not in order to torment his fellow beings that Socrates
kept on stinging them.
Something within him left him no choice. He always said that
he had a “divine voice” inside him. Socrates protested, for example,
against having any part in condemning people to death. He
moreover refused to inform on his political enemies. This was
eventually to cost him his life.
In the year 399 B.C. he was accused of “introducing new gods
and corrupting the youth,” as well as not believing in the accepted
gods. With a slender majority, a jury of five hundred found him
guilty.
He could very likely have appealed for leniency. At least he
could have saved his life by agreeing to leave Athens. But had he
done this he would not have been Socrates. He valued his
conscience—and the truth— higher than life. He assured the jury
that he had only acted in the best interests of the state. He was
nevertheless condemned to drink hemlock. Shortly thereafter, he
drank the poison in the presence of his friends, and died.
Why, Sophie? Why did Socrates have to die? People have been
asking this question for 2,400 years. However, he was not the only
person in history to have seen things through to the bitter end and
suffered death for the sake of their convictions.
I have mentioned Jesus already, and in fact there are several
striking parallels between them.
66
Both Jesus and Socrates were enigmatic personalities, also to
their contemporaries.
Neither of them wrote down their teachings, so we are forced
to rely on the picture we have of them from their disciples. But we
do know that they were both masters of the art of discourse. They
both spoke with a characteristic self-assuredness that could fascinate
as well as exasperate. And not least, they both believed that they
spoke on behalf of something greater than themselves. They
challenged the power of the community by criticizing all forms of
injustice and corruption. And finally—their activities cost them their
lives.
The trials of Jesus and Socrates also exhibit clear parallels.
They could certainly both have saved themselves by appealing
for mercy, but they both felt they had a mission that would have
been betrayed unless they kept faith to the bitter end. And by
meeting their death so bravely they commanded an enormous
following, also after they had died.
I do not mean to suggest that Jesus and Socrates were alike. I
am merely drawing attention to the fact that they both had a message
that was inseparably linked to their personal courage.
A Joker in Athens
Socrates, Sophie! We aren’t done with him yet. We have talked
about his method. But what was his philosophical project?
Socrates lived at the same time as the Sophists. Like them, he
was more concerned with man and his place in society than with the
forces of nature. As a Roman philosopher, Cicero, said of him a few
hundred years later, Socrates “called philosophy down from the sky
and es- tablished her in the towns and introduced her into homes and
forced her to investigate life, ethics, good and evil.”
But Socrates differed from the Sophists in one significant way.
He did not consider himself to be a “sophist”—that is, a learned or
wise person. Unlike the Sophists, he did not teach for money. No,
Socrates called himself a philosopher in the true sense of the word.
A “philosopher” really means “one who loves wisdom.”
Are you sitting comfortably, Sophie? Because it is central to 
67
the rest of this course that you fully understand the difference
between a sophist and a philosopher. The Sophists took money for
their more or less hairsplitting expoundings, and sophists of this
kind have come and gone from time immemorial. I am referring to
all the schoolmasters and self-opinionated know-it-alls who are
satisfied with what little they know, or who boast of knowing a
whole lot about subjects they haven’t the faintest notion of. You
have probably come across a few of these sophists in your young
life. A real philosopher, Sophie, is a completely different kettle of
fish—the direct opposite, in fact. A philosopher knows that in reality
he knows very little. That is why he constantly strives to achieve
true insight. Socrates was one of these rare people. He knew that he
knew nothing about life and about the world. And now comes the
important part: it troubled him that he knew so little.
A philosopher is therefore someone who recognizes that there
is a lot he does not understand, and is troubled by it. In that sense,
he is still wiser than all those who brag about their knowledge of
things they know nothing about. “Wisest is she who knows she does
not know,” I said previously. Socrates himself said, “One thing only
I know, and that is that I know nothing.”
Remember this statement, because it is an admission that is
rare, even among philosophers. Moreover, it can be so dangerous to
say it in public that it can cost you your life. The most subversive
people are those who ask questions. Giving answers is not nearly as
threatening. Any one question can be more explosive than a
thousand answers.
You remember the story of the emperor’s new clothes? The
emperor was actually stark naked but none of his subjects dared say
so. Suddenly a child burst out, “But he’s got nothing on!” That was
a courageous child, Sophie. Like Socrates, who dared tell people
how little we humans know. The similarity between children and
philosophers is something we have already talked about.
To be precise: Mankind is faced with a number of difficult
questions that we have no satisfactory answers to. So now two
possibilities present themselves: We can either fool ourselves and
the rest of the world by pretending that we know all there is to know, 
68
or we can shut our eyes to the central issues once and for all and
abandon all progress. In this sense, humanity is divided. People are,
generally speaking, either dead certain or totally indifferent. (Both
types are crawling around deep down in the rabbit’s fur!)
It is like dividing a deck of cards into two piles, Sophie. You
lay the black cards in one pile and the red in the other. But from time
to time a joker turns up that is neither heart nor club, neither
diamond nor spade. Socrates was this joker in Athens. He was
neither certain nor indifferent. All he knew was that he knew
nothing—and it troubled him. So he became a philosopher—
someone who does not give up but tirelessly pursues his quest for
truth.
An Athenian is said to have asked the oracle at Delphi who the
wisest man in Athens was. The oracle answered that Socrates of all
mortals was the wisest. When Socrates heard this he was astounded,
to put it mildly. (He must have laughed, Sophie!) He went straight
to the person in the city whom he, and everyone else, thought was
excessively wise. But when it turned out that this person was unable
to give Socrates satisfactory answers to his questions, Socrates
realized that the oracle had been right.
Socrates felt that it was necessary to establish a solid
foundation for our knowledge. He believed that this foundation lay
in man’s reason. With his unshakable faith in human reason he was
decidedly a rationalist.
The Right Insight Leads to the Right Action
As I have mentioned earlier, Socrates claimed that he was
guided by a divine inner voice, and that this “conscience” told him
what was right. “He who knows what good is will do good,” he said.
By this he meant that the right insight leads to the right action.
And only he who does right can be a “virtuous man.” When we do
wrong it is because we don’t know any better. That is why it is so
important to go on learning. Socrates was concerned with finding
clear and universally valid definitions of right and wrong. Unlike the
Sophists, he believed that the ability to distinguish between right and
wrong lies in people’s reason and not in society.
69
You may perhaps think this last part is a bit too obscure,
Sophie. Let me put it like this: Socrates thought that no one could
possibly be happy if they acted against their better judgment. And
he who knows how to achieve happiness will do so. Therefore, he
who knows what is right will do right. Because why would anybody
choose to be unhappy?
What do you think, Sophie? Can you live a happy life if you
continually do things you know deep down are wrong? There are
lots of people who lie and cheat and speak ill of others.
Are they aware that these things are not right—or fair, if you
prefer? Do you think these people are happy?
Socrates didn’t.
When Sophie had read the letter, she quickly put it in the cookie
tin and crawled out into the garden. She wanted to go indoors before
her mother got back with the shopping in order to avoid any
questions about where she had been. And she had promised to do
the dishes.
She had just filled the sink with water when her mother came
staggering in with two huge shopping bags. Perhaps that was why
her mother said, “You are rather preoccupied these days, Sophie.”
Sophie didn’t know why she said it; the words just tumbled out
of her mouth: “So was Socrates.” “Socrates?”
Her mother stared at her, wide-eyed.
“It was just so sad that he had to die as a result,” Sophie went
on thoughtfully. “My goodness! Sophie! I don’t know what I’m to
do!”
“Neither did Socrates. All he knew was that he knew nothing.
And yet he was the cleverest person in Athens.”
Her mother was speechless.
Finally she said, “Is this something you’ve learned at school?”
Sophie shook her head energetically.
“We don’t learn anything there. The difference between
schoolteachers and philosophers is that school-teachers think they
know a lot of stuff that they try to force down our throats.
Philosophers try to figure things out together with the pupils.”
“Now we’re back to white rabbits again! You know something? 
70
I demand to know who your boyfriend really is. Otherwise I’ll begin
to think he is a bit disturbed.”
Sophie turned her back on the dishes and pointed at her mother
with the dish mop.
“It’s not him who’s disturbed. But he likes to disturb others—
to shake them out of their rut.” “That’s enough of that! I think he
sounds a bit too impertinent.” Sophie turned back to the dishes. “He
is neither impertinent nor pertinent,” said Sophie. “But he is trying
to reach real wisdom.
That’s the great difference between a real joker and all the other
cards in the deck.” “Did you say joker?”
Sophie nodded. “Have you ever thought about the fact that
there are a lot of hearts and diamonds in a pack of cards? And a lot
of spades and clubs. But there’s only one joker.”
“Good grief, how you talk back, Sophie!” “And how you ask!”
Her mother had put all the groceries away. Now she took the
newspaper and went into the living room. Sophie thought she closed
the door more loudly than usual.
Sophie finished doing the dishes and went upstairs to her room.
She had put the red silk scarf on the top shelf of the closet with the
Lego blocks. She took it down and examined it carefully.
Hilde ...
71
Athens
... several tall buildings had risen from the ruins …
Early that evening Sophie’s mother went to visit a friend. As soon
as she was out of the house Sophie went down the garden to the den.
There she found a thick package beside the big cookie tin. Sophie
tore it open. It was a video cassette.
She ran back to the house. A video tape! How on earth did the
philosopher know they had a VCR?
And what was on the cassette?
Sophie put the cassette into the recorder. A sprawling city
appeared on the TV screen. As the camera zoomed in on the
Acropolis Sophie realized that the city must be Athens. She had
often seen pictures of the ancient ruins there.
It was a live shot. Summer-clad tourists with cameras slung
about them were swarming among the ruins. One of them looked as
if he was carrying a notice board. There it was again. Didn’t it say
“Hilde”?
After a minute or two there was a close-up of a middle-aged
man. He was rather short, with a black, well-trimmed beard, and he
was wearing a blue beret. He looked into the camera and said:
“Welcome to Athens, Sophie. As you have probably guessed, I am
Alberto Knox. If not, I will just reiterate that the big rabbit is still
being pulled from the top hat of the universe.
“We are standing at the Acropolis. The word means ‘citadel’—
or more precisely, ‘the city on the hill.’ People have lived up here
since the Stone Age. The reason, naturally, was its unique location.
The elevated plateau was easy to defend against marauders. From
the Acropolis there was also an excellent view down to one of the
best harbors in the Mediterranean. As the early Athens began to
develop on the plain below the plateau, the Acropolis was used as a
fortress and sacred shrine... During the first half of the fifth century
B.C., a bitter war was waged against the Persians, and in 480 the
Persian king Xerxes plundered Athens and burned all the old
wooden buildings of the Acropolis. A year later the Persians were 
72
defeated, and that was the beginning of the Golden Age of Athens.
The Acropolis was rebuilt— prouder and more magnificent than
ever—and now purely as a sacred shrine.
“This was the period when Socrates walked through the streets
and squares talking with the Athenians. He could thus have
witnessed the rebirth of the Acropolis and watched the construction
of all the proud buildings we see around us. And what a building site
it was! Behind me you can see the biggest temple, the Parthenon,
which means ‘the Virgin’s Place.’ It was built in honor of Athene,
the patron goddess of Athens. The huge marble structure does not
have a single straight line; all four sides are slightly curved to make
the building appear less heavy. In spite of its colossal dimensions, it
gives the impression of lightness. In other words, it presents an
optical illusion. The columns lean slightly inwards, and would form
a pyramid 1,500 meters high if they were continued to a point above
the temple. The temple contained nothing but a twelve-meter-high
statue of Athene. The white marble, which in those days was painted
in vivid colors, was transported here from a mountain sixteen
kilometers away.”
Sophie sat with her heart in her mouth. Was this really the
philosopher talking to her? She had only seen his profile that one
time in the darkness. Could he be the same man who was now
standing at the Acropolis in Athens?
He began to walk along the length of the temple and the camera
followed him. He walked right to the edge of the terrace and pointed
out over the landscape. The camera focused on an old theater which
lay just below the plateau of the Acropolis.
“There you can see the old Dionysos Theater,” continued the
man in the beret. “It is probably the very oldest theater in Europe.
This is where the great tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and
Euripides were performed during the time of Socrates. I referred
earlier to the ill-fated King Oedipus. The tragedy about him, by
Sophocles, was first performed here. But they also played comedies.
The best known writer of comedies was Aristophanes, who also
wrote a spiteful comedy about Socrates as the buffoon of Athens.
Right at the back you can see the stone wall which the actors used 
73
as a backdrop. It was called skene, and is the origin of our word
‘scene.’ Incidentally, the word ‘theater’ comes from an old Greek
word meaning ‘to see.’ But we must get back to the philosophers,
Sophie. We are going around the Parthenon and down through the
gateway ...”
The little man walked around the huge temple and passed some
smaller temples on his right. Then he began to walk down some
steps between several tall columns. When he reached the foot of the
Acropolis, he went up a small hill and pointed out toward Athens:
“The hill we are standing on is called Areopagos. It was here that
the Athenian high court of justice passed judgment in murder trials.
Many hundreds of years later, St. Paul the Apostle stood here and
preached about Jesus and Christianity to the Athenians. We shall
return to what he said on a later occasion. Down to the left you can
see the remains of the old city square in Athens, the agora. With the
exception of the large temple to Hephaestos, the god of smiths and
metalworkers, only some blocks of marble are preserved. Let us go
down ...”
The next moment he appeared among the ancient ruins. High
up beneath the sky—at the top of Sophie’s screen—towered the
monumental Athene temple on the Acropolis. Her philosophy
teacher had seated himself on one of the blocks of marble. He looked
into the camera and said: “We are sitting in the old agora in Athens.
A sorry sight, don’t you think? Today, I mean. But once it was
surrounded by splendid temples, courts of justice and other public
offices, shops, a concert hall, and even a large gymnastics building.
All situated around the square, which was a large open space ... The
whole of European civilization was founded in this modest area.
“Words such as politics and democracy, economy and history,
biology and physics, mathematics and logic, theology and
philosophy, ethics and psychology, theory and method, idea and
system date back to the tiny populace whose everyday life centered
around this square. This is where Socrates spent so much of his time
talking to the people he met. He might have buttonholed a slave 
74
bearing a jar of olive oil, and asked the unfortunate man a question
on philosophy, for Socrates held that a slave had the same common
sense as a man of rank. Perhaps he stood in an animated wrangle
with one of the citizens—or held a subdued conversation with his
young pupil Plato. It is extraordinary to think about. We still speak
of Socratic or Platonic philosophy, but actually being Plato or
Socrates is quite another matter.”
Sophie certainly did think it was extraordinary to think about.
But she thought it was just as extraordinary the way her philosopher
was suddenly talking to her on a video that had been brought to her
own secret hideout in the garden by a mysterious dog.
The philosopher rose from the block of marble he was sitting
on and said quietly: “It was actually my intention to leave it at that,
Sophie. I wanted you to see the Acropolis and the remains of the old
agora in Athens. But I am not yet sure that you have grasped just
how splendid these surroundings once were ... so I am very tempted
to go a bit further. It is quite irregular of course ... but I am sure I
can count on it remaining just between the two of us. Oh well, a tiny
glimpse will suffice anyway ...”
He said no more, but remained standing there for a long time,
staring into the camera. While he stood there, several tall buildings
had risen from the ruins. As if by magic, all the old buildings were
once again standing.
Above the skyline Sophie could still see the Acropolis, but now
both that and all the buildings down on the square were brand-new.
They were covered with gold and painted in garish colors. Gaily
dressed people were strolling about the square. Some wore swords,
others carried jars on their heads, and one of them had a roll of
papyrus under his arm.
Then Sophie recognized her philosophy teacher. He was still
wearing the blue beret, but now he was dressed in a yellow tunic in
the same style as everyone else. He came toward Sophie, looked into
the camera, and said:
“That’s better! Now we are in the Athens of antiquity, Sophie.
I wanted you to come here in person, you see. We are in the year
402 B.C., only three years before Socrates dies. I hope you 
75
appreciate this exclusive visit because it was very difficult to hire a
video camera ...”
Sophie felt dizzy. How could this weird man suddenly be in
Athens 2,400 years ago? How could she be seeing a video film of a
totally different age? There were no videos in antiquity ... so could
this be a movie?
But all the marble buildings looked real. If they had recreated
all of the old square in Athens as well as the Acropolis just for the
sake of a film—the sets would have cost a fortune. At any rate it
would be a colossal price to pay just to teach Sophie about Athens.
The man in the beret looked up at her again.
“Do you see those two men over there under the colonnade?”
Sophie noticed an elderly man in a crumpled tunic. He had a
long unkempt beard, a snub nose, eyes like gimlets, and chubby
cheeks. Beside him stood a handsome young man.
“That is Socrates and his young pupil, Plato. You are going to
meet them personally.”
The philosopher went over to the two men, took off his beret,
and said something which Sophie did not understand. It must have
been in Greek. Then he looked into the camera and said, “I told them
you were a Norwegian girl who would very much like to meet them.
So now Plato will give you some questions to think about. But
we must do it quickly before the guards discover us.”
Sophie felt the blood pounding in her temples as the
young man stepped forward and looked into the camera.
“Welcome to Athens, Sophie,” he said in a gentle voice.
He spoke with an accent. “My name is Plato and I am going
to give you four tasks. First you must think over how a baker
can bake fifty absolutely identical cookies. Then you can ask
yourself why all horses are the same. Next you must decide
whether you think that man has an immortal soul. And finally
you must say whether men and women are equally sensible.
Good luck!”
Then the picture on the TV screen disappeared. Sophie
wound and rewound the tape but she had seen all there was.
76
Sophie tried to think things through clearly. But as soon
as she thought one thought, another one crowded in before
she had thought the first one to its end.
She had known from the start that her philosophy
teacher was eccentric. But when he started to use teaching
methods that defied all the laws of nature, Sophie thought he
was going too far.
Had she really seen Socrates and Plato on TV? Of
course not, that was impossible. But it definitely wasn’t a
cartoon.
Sophie took the cassette out of the video recorder and
ran up to her room with it. She put it on the top shelf with all
the Lego blocks. Then she sank onto the bed, exhausted, and
fell asleep.
Some hours later her mother came into the room. She
shook Sophie gently and said: “What’s the matter, Sophie?”
“Mmmm?”
“You’ve gone to sleep with all your clothes on!” Sophie
blinked her eyes sleepily.
“I’ve been to Athens,” she mumbled. That was all she
could manage to say as she turned over and went back to
sleep.
77
Plato
… a longing to return to the realm of the soul…
Sophie woke with a start early the next morning. She glanced at the
clock. It was only a little after five but she was so wide awake that
she sat up in bed. Why was she wearing a dress? Then she
remembered everything.
She climbed onto a stool and looked on the top shelf of the
closet. Yes—there, at the back, was the video cassette. It hadn’t been
a dream after all; at least, not all of it.
But she couldn’t really have seen Plato and Socrates ... oh,
never mind! She didn’t have the energy to think about it anymore.
Perhaps her mother was right, perhaps she was acting a bit nuts these
days.
Anyway, she couldn’t go back to sleep. Perhaps she ought to
go down to the den and see if the dog had left another letter. Sophie
crept downstairs, put on a pair of jogging shoes, and went out.
In the garden everything was wonderfully clear and still. The
birds were chirping so energetically that Sophie could hardly keep
from laughing. The morning dew twinkled in the grass like drops of
crystal. Once again she was struck by the incredible wonder of the
world.
Inside the old hedge it was also very damp. Sophie saw no new
letter from the philosopher, but nevertheless she wiped off one of
the thick roots and sat down.
She recalled that the video-Plato had given her some questions
to answer. The first was something about how a baker could bake
fifty identical cookies.
Sophie had to think very carefully about that, because it
definitely wouldn’t be easy. When her mother occasionally baked a
batch of cookies, they were never all exactly the same. But then she
was not an expert pastry cook; sometimes the kitchen looked as if a
bomb had hit it. Even the cookies they bought at the baker’s were
never exactly the same. Every single cookie was shaped separately
in the baker’s hands.
78
Then a satisfied smile spread over Sophie’s face. She
remembered how once she and her father went shopping while her
mother was busy baking Christmas cookies. When they got back
there were a lot of gingerbread men spread out on the kitchen table.
Even though they weren’t all perfect, in a way they were all the
same. And why was that? Obviously because her mother had used
the same mold for all of them.
Sophie felt so pleased with herself for having remembered the
incident that she pronounced herself done with the first question. If
a baker makes fifty absolutely identical cookies, he must be using
the same pastry mold for all of them. And that’s that!
Then the video-Plato had looked into the camera and asked why
all horses were the same. But they weren’t, at all! On the contrary,
Sophie thought no two horses were the same, just as no two people
were the same.
She was ready to give up on that one when she remembered
what she had thought about the cookies. No one of them was exactly
like any of the others. Some were a bit thicker than the others, and
some were broken. But still, everyone could see that they were—in
a way— “exactly the same.”
What Plato was really asking was perhaps why a horse was
always a horse, and not, for example, a cross between a horse and a
pig. Because even though some horses were as brown as bears and
others were as white as lambs, all horses had something in common.
Sophie had yet to meet a horse with six or eight legs, for example.
But surely Plato couldn’t believe that what made all horses
alike was that they were made with the same mold?
Then Plato had asked her a really difficult question. Does man
have an immortal soul? That was something Sophie felt quite
unqualified to answer. All she knew was that dead bodies were
either cremated or buried, so there was no future for them. If man
had an immortal soul, one would have to believe that a person
consisted of two separate parts: a body that gets worn out after many
years—and a soul that operates more or less independently of what 
79
happens to the body. Her grandmother had said once that she felt it
was only her body that was old. Inside she had always been the same
young girl-The thought of the “young girl” led Sophie to the last
question: Are women and men equally sensible? She was not so sure
about that. It depended on what Plato meant by sensible.
Something the philosopher had said about Socrates came into
her mind. Socrates had pointed out that everyone could understand
philosophical truths if they just used their common sense. He had
also said that a slave had the same common sense as a nobleman.
Sophie was sure that he would also have said that women had the
same common sense as men.
While she sat thinking, there was a sudden rustling in the
hedge, and the sound of something puffing and blowing like a steam
engine. The next second, the golden Labrador slipped into the den.
It had a large envelope in its mouth.
“Hermes!” cried Sophie. “Drop it! Drop it!” The dog dropped
the envelope in Sophie’s lap, and Sophie stretched out her hand to
pat the dog’s head. “Good boy, Hermes!” she said. The dog lay
down and allowed itself to be patted. But after a couple of minutes
it got up and began to push its way back through the hedge the same
way it had come in. Sophie followed with the brown envelope in her
hand. She crawled through the dense thicket and was soon outside
the garden.
Hermes had already started to run toward the edge of the
woods, and Sophie followed a few yards behind. Twice the dog
turned around and growled, but Sophie was not to be deterred.
This time she was determined to find the philosopher—even if
it meant running all the way to Athens.
The dog ran faster and suddenly turned off down a narrow path.
Sophie chased him, but after a few minutes he turned and faced her,
barking like a watchdog. Sophie still refused to give up, taking the
opportunity to lessen the distance between them.
Hermes turned and raced down the path. Sophie realized that
she would never catch up with him. She stood quite still for what
seemed like an eternity, listening to him running farther and farther
away. Then all was silent.
80
She sat down on a tree stump by a little clearing in the woods.
She still had the brown envelope in her hand. She opened it, drew
out several typewritten pages, and began to read:
PLATO’S ACADEMY
Thank you for the pleasant time we spent together, Sophie. In
Athens, I mean. So now I have at least introduced myself. And since
I have also introduced Plato, we might as well begin without further
ado.
Plato (428-347 B.C.) was twenty-nine years old when Socrates
drank the hemlock. He had been a pupil of Socrates for some time
and had followed his trial very closely. The fact that Athens could
condemn its noblest citizen to death did more than make a profound
impression on him. It was to shape the course of his entire
philosophic endeavor.
To Plato, the death of Socrates was a striking example of the
conflict that can exist between society as it really is and the true or
ideal society. Plato’s first deed as a philosopher was to publish
Socrates’ Apology, an account of his plea to the large jury.
As you will no doubt recall, Socrates never wrote anything
down, although many of the pre-Socratics did. The problem is that
hardly any of their written material remains. But in the case of Plato,
we believe that all his principal works have been preserved. (In
addition to Socrates’ Apology, Plato wrote a collection of Epistles
and about twenty-five philosophical Dialogues.) That we have these
works today is due not least to the fact that Plato set up his own
school of philosophy in a grove not far from Athens, named after
the legendary Greek hero Academus. The school was therefore
known as the Academy. (Since then, many thousands of
“academies” have been established all over the world. We still speak
of “academics” and “academic subjects.”)
The subjects taught at Plato’s Academy were philosophy,
mathematics, and gymnastics—although perhaps “taught” is hardly
the right word. Lively discourse was considered most important at
Plato’s Academy. So it was not purely by chance that Plato’s
writings took the form of dialogues.
81
The Eternally True, Eternally Beautiful, and Eternally Good
In the introduction to this course I mentioned that it could often
be a good idea to ask what a particular philosopher’s project was.
So now I ask: what were the problems Plato was concerned with?
Briefly, we can establish that Plato was concerned with the
relationship between what is eternal and immutable, on the one
hand, and what “flows,” on the other. (Just like the pre-Socratics, in
fact.) We’ve seen how the Sophists and Socrates turned their
attention from questions of natural philosophy to problems related
to man and society. And yet in one sense, even Socrates and the
Sophists were preoccupied with the relationship between the eternal
and immutable, and the “flowing.” They were interested in the
problem as it related to human morals and society’s ideals or virtues.
Very briefly, the Sophists thought that perceptions of what was right
or wrong varied from one city-state to another, and from one
generation to the next. So right and wrong was something that
“flowed.” This was totally unacceptable to Socrates. He believed in
the existence of eternal and absolute rules for what was right or
wrong. By using our common sense we can all arrive at these
immutable norms, since human reason is in fact eternal and
immutable.
Do you follow, Sophie? Then along comes Plato. He is
concerned with both what is eternal and immutable in nature and
what is eternal and immutable as regards morals and society. To
Plato, these two problems were one and the same. He tried to grasp
a “reality” that was eternal and immutable. And to be quite frank,
that is precisely what we need philosophers for. We do not need
them to choose a beauty queen or the day’s bargain in tomatoes.
(This is why they are often unpopular!) Philosophers will try to
ignore highly topical affairs and instead try to draw people’s
attention to what is eternally “true,” eternally “beautiful,” and
eternally “good.”
We can thus begin to glimpse at least the outline of Plato’s
philosophical project. But let’s take one thing at a time. We are
attempting to understand an extraordinary mind, a mind that was to 
82
have a profound influence on all subsequent European philosophy.
The World of Ideas
Both Empedocles and Democritus had drawn attention to the
fact that although in the natural world everything “flows,” there
must nevertheless be “something” that never changes (the “four
roots,” or the “atoms”). Plato agreed with the proposition as such—
but in quite a different way.
Plato believed that everything tangible in nature “flows.” So
there are no “substances” that do not dissolve. Absolutely
everything that belongs to the “material world” is made of a material
that time can erode, but everything is made after a timeless “mold”
or “form” that is eternal and immutable.
You see? No, you don’t.
Why are horses the same, Sophie? You probably don’t think
they are at all. But there is something that all horses have in
common, something that enables us to identify them as horses. A
particular horse “flows,” naturally. It might be old and lame, and in
time it will die. But the “form” of the horse is eternal and immutable.
That which is eternal and immutable, to Plato, is therefore not
a physical “basic substance,” as it was for Empedocles and
Democritus. Plato’s conception was of eternal and immutable
patterns, spiritual and abstract in their nature that all things are
fashioned after.
Let me put it like this: The pre-Socratics had given a reasonably
good explanation of natural change without having to presuppose
that anything actually “changed.” In the midst of nature’s cycle there
were some eternal and immutable smallest elements that did not
dissolve, they thought. Fair enough, Sophie! But they had no
reasonable explanation for how these “smallest elements” that were
once building blocks in a horse could suddenly whirl together four
or five hundred years later and fashion themselves into a completely
new horse. Or an elephant or a crocodile, for that matter. Plato’s
point was that Democritus’ atoms never fashioned themselves into
an “eledile” or a “crocophant.” This was what set his philosophical
reflections going.
If you already understand what I am getting at, you may skip 
83
this next paragraph. But just in case, I will clarify: You have a box
of Lego and you build a Lego horse. You then take it apart and put
the blocks back in the box. You cannot expect to make a new horse
just by shaking the box. How could Lego blocks of their own accord
find each other and become a new horse again? No, you have to
rebuild the horse, Sophie. And the reason you can do it is that you
have a picture in your mind of what the horse looked like. The Lego
horse is made from a model which remains unchanged from horse
to horse.
How did you do with the fifty identical cookies? Let us assume
that you have dropped in from outer space and have never seen a
baker before. You stumble into a tempting bakery— and there you
catch sight of fifty identical gingerbread men on a shelf. I imagine
you would wonder how they could be exactly alike. It might well be
that one of them has an arm missing, another has lost a bit of its
head, and a third has a funny bump on its stomach. But after careful
thought, you would nevertheless conclude that all gingerbread men
have something in common. Although none of them is perfect, you
would suspect that they had a common origin. You would realize
that all the cookies were formed in the same mold. And what is
more, Sophie, you are now seized by the irresistible desire to see
this mold. Because clearly, the mold itself must be utter perfection—
and in a sense, more beautiful—in comparison with these crude
copies.
If you solved this problem all by yourself, you arrived at the
philosophical solution in exactly the same way that Plato did.
Like most philosophers, he “dropped in from outer space.” (He
stood up on the very tip of one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s fur.)
He was astonished at the way all natural phenomena could be so
alike, and he concluded that it had to be because there are a limited
number of forms “behind” everything we see around us. Plato called
these forms ideas. Behind every horse, pig, or human being, there is
the “idea horse,” “idea pig,” and “idea human being.” (In the same
way, the bakery we spoke of can have gingerbread men, gingerbread
horses, and gingerbread pigs. Because every self-respecting bakery
has more than one mold. But one mold is enough for each type of
gingerbread cookie.)
84
Plato came to the conclusion that there must be a reality behind
the “material world.” He called this reality the world of ideas; it
contained the eternal and immutable “patterns” behind the various
phenomena we come across in nature. This remarkable view is
known as Plato’s theory of ideas.
True Knowledge
I’m sure you’ve been following me, Sophie dear. But you may
be wondering whether Plato was being serious. Did he really believe
that forms like these actually existed in a completely different
reality?
He probably didn’t believe it literally in the same way for all
his life, but in some of his dialogues that is certainly how he means
to be understood. Let us try to follow his train of thought.
A philosopher, as we have seen, tries to grasp something that is
eternal and immutable.
It would serve no purpose, for instance, to write a philosophic
treatise on the existence of a particular soap bubble. Partly because
one would hardly have time to study it in depth before it burst, and
partly because it would probably be rather difficult to find a market
for a philosophic treatise on something nobody has ever seen, and
which only existed for five seconds.
Plato believed that everything we see around us in nature,
everything tangible, can be likened to a soap bubble, since nothing
that exists in the world of the senses is lasting. We know, of course,
that sooner or later every human being and every animal will die and
decompose. Even a block of marble changes and gradually
disintegrates. (The Acropolis is falling into ruin, Sophie! It is a
scandal, but that’s the way it is.) Plato’s point is that we can never
have true knowledge of anything that is in a constant state of change.
We can only have opinions about things that belong to the world of
the senses, tangible things. We can only have true knowledge of
things that can be understood with our reason.
All right, Sophie, I’ll explain it more clearly: a gingerbread man
can be so lopsided after all that baking that it can be quite hard to
see what it is meant to be. But having seen dozens of gingerbread
men that were more or less successful, I can be pretty sure what the 
85
cookie mold was like. I can guess, even though I have never seen it.
It might not even be an advantage to see the actual mold with my
own eyes because we cannot always trust the evidence of our senses.
The faculty of vision can vary from person to person. On the other
hand, we can rely on what our reason tells us because that is the
same for everyone.
If you are sitting in a classroom with thirty other pupils, and the
teacher asks the class which color of the rainbow is the prettiest, he
will probably get a lot of different answers. But if he asks what 8
times 3 is, the whole class will—we hope—give the same answer.
Because now reason is speaking and reason is, in a way, the direct
opposite of “thinking so” or “feeling.” We could say that reason is
eternal and universal precisely because it only expresses eternal and
universal states.
Plato found mathematics very absorbing because mathematical
states never change. They are therefore states we can have true
knowledge of. But here we need an example.
Imagine you find a round pinecone out in the woods. Perhaps
you say you “think” it looks completely round, whereas Joanna
insists it is a bit flattened on one side. (Then you start arguing about
it!) But you cannot have true knowledge of anything you can
perceive with your eyes. On the other hand you can say with
absolute certainty that the sum of the angles in a circle is 360
degrees. In this case you would be talking about an ideal circle
which might not exist in the physical world but which you can
clearly visualize. (You are dealing with the hidden gingerbread-man
mold and not with the particular cookie on the kitchen table.)
In short, we can only have inexact conceptions of things we
perceive with our senses. But we can have true knowledge of things
we understand with our reason. The sum of the angles in a triangle
will remain 180 degrees to the end of time. And similarly the “idea”
horse will walk on four legs even if all the horses in the sensory
world break a leg.
An Immortal Soul
As I explained, Plato believed that reality is divided into two
regions.
One region is the world of the senses, about which we can only 
86
have approximate or incomplete knowledge by using our five
(approximate or incomplete) senses. In this sensory world,
“everything flows” and nothing is permanent. Nothing in the
sensory world is, there are only things that come to be and pass
away.
The other region is the world of ideas, about which we can have
true knowledge by using our reason. This world of ideas cannot be
perceived by the senses, but the ideas (or forms) are eternal and
immutable.
According to Plato, man is a dual creature. We have a body that
“flows,” is inseparably bound to the world of the senses, and is
subject to the same fate as everything else in this world—a soap
bubble, for example. All our senses are based in the body and are
consequently unreliable. But we also have an immortal soul—and
this soul is the realm of reason. And not being physical, the soul can
survey the world of ideas.
But that’s not all, Sophie. IT’S NOT ALL!
Plato also believed that the soul existed before it inhabited the
body, (it was lying on a shelf in the closet with all the cookie molds.)
But as soon as the soul wakes up in a human body, it has forgotten
all the perfect ideas. Then something starts to happen. In fact, a
wondrous process begins. As the human being discovers the various
forms in the natural world, a vague recollection stirs his soul. He
sees a horse—but an imperfect horse. (A gingerbread horse!) The
sight of it is sufficient to awaken in the soul a faint recollection of
the perfect “horse,” which the soul once saw in the world of ideas,
and this stirs the soul with a yearning to return to its true realm. Plato
calls this yearning eras—which means love. The soul, then,
experiences a “longing to return to its true origin.” From now on,
the body and the whole sensory world is experienced as imperfect
and insignificant. The soul yearns to fly home on the wings of love
to the world of ideas. It longs to be freed from the chains of the body.
Let me quickly emphasize that Plato is describing an ideal
course of life, since by no means all humansset the soul free to begin
its journey back to the world of ideas. Most people cling to the
sensory world’s “reflections” of ideas. They see a horse—and
another horse. But they never see that of which every horse is only 
87
a feeble imitation. (They rush into the kitchen and stuff themselves
with gingerbread cookies without so much as a thought as to where
they came from.) What Plato describes is the philosophers’ way. His
philosophy can be read as a description of philosophic practice.
When you see a shadow, Sophie, you will assume that there
must be something casting the shadow. You see the shadow of an
animal. You think it may be a horse, but you are not quite sure. So
you turn around and see the horse itself—which of course is
infinitely more beautiful and sharper in outline than the blurred
“horse-shadow.” Plato believed similarly that all natural phenomena
are merely shadows of the eternal forms or ideas. But most people
are content with a life among shadows. They give no thought to what
is casting the shadows. They think shadows are all there are, never
realizing even that they are, in fact, shadows. And thus they pay no
heed to the immortality of their own soul.
Out of the Darkness of the Cave
Plato relates a myth which illustrates this. We call it the Myth
of the Cave. I’ll retell it in my own words.
Imagine some people living in an underground cave. They sit
with their backs to the mouth of the cave with their hands and feet
bound in such a way that they can only look at the back wall of the
cave. Behind them is a high wall, and behind that wall pass humanlike creatures, holding up various figures above the top of the wall.
Because there is a fire behind these figures, they cast flickering
shadows on the back wall of the cave. So the only thing the cave
dwellers can see is this shadow play. They have been sitting in this
position since they were born, so they think these shadows are all
there are.
Imagine now that one of the cave dwellers manages to free
himself from his bonds. The first thing he asks himself is where all
these shadows on the cave wall come from. What do you think
happens when he turns around and sees the figures being held up
above the wall? To begin with he is dazzled by the sharp sunlight.
He is also dazzled by the clarity of the figures because until now he
has only seen their shadow. If he manages to climb over the wall
and get past the fire into the world outside, he will be even more 
88
dazzled. But after rubbing his eyes he will be struck by the beauty
of everything. For the first time he will see colors and clear shapes.
He will see the real animals and flowers that the cave shadows were
only poor reflections of. But even now he will ask himself where all
the animals and flowers come from.
Then he will see the sun in the sky, and realize that this is what
gives life to these flowers and animals, just as the fire made the
shadows visible.
The joyful cave dweller could now have gone skipping away
into the countryside, delighting in his new-found freedom. But
instead he thinks of all the others who are still down in the cave. He
goes back. Once there, he tries to convince the cave dwellers that
the shadows on the cave wall are but flickering reflections of “real”
things. But they don’t believe him. They point to the cave wall and
say that what they see is all there is. Finally they kill him.
What Plato was illustrating in the Myth of the Cave is the
philosopher’s road from shadowy images to the true ideas behind all
natural phenomena. He was probably also think- ing of Socrates,
whom the “cave dwellers” killed because he disturbed their
conventional ideas and tried to light the way to true insight. The
Myth of the Cave illustrates Socrates’ courage and his sense of
pedagogic responsibility.
Plato’s point was that the relationship between the darkness of
the cave and the world beyond corresponds to the relationship
between the forms of the natural world and the world of ideas. Not
that he meant that the natural world is dark and dreary, but that it is
dark and dreary in comparison with the clarity of ideas. A picture of
a beautiful landscape is not dark and dreary either. But it is only a
picture.
The Philosophic State
The Myth of the Cave is found in Plato’s dialogue the Republic.
In this dialogue Plato also presents a picture of the “ideal state,” that
is to say an imaginary, ideal, or what we would call a Utopian, state.
Briefly, we could say that Plato believed the state should be
governed by philosophers. He bases his explanation of this on the 
89
construction of the human body.
According to Plato, the human body is composed of three parts:
the head, the chest, and the abdomen. For each of these three parts
there is a corresponding faculty of the soul.
Reason belongs to the head, will belongs to the chest, and
appetite belongs to the abdomen. Each of these soul faculties also
has an ideal, or “virtue.” Reason aspires to wisdom, Will aspires to
courage, and Appetite must be curbed so that temperance can be
exercised. Only when the three parts of the body function together
as a unity do we get a harmonious or “virtuous” individual. At
school, a child must first learn to curb its appetites, then it must
develop courage, and finally reason leads to wisdom.
Plato now imagines a state built up exactly like the tripartite
human body. Where the body has head, chest, and abdomen, the
State has rulers, auxiliaries, and fa-borers (farmers, for example).
Here Plato clearly uses Greek medical science as his model. Just as
a healthy and harmonious man exercises balance and temperance,
so a “virtuous” state is characterized by everyone knowing their
place in the overall picture.
Like every aspect of Plato’s philosophy, his political
philosophy is characterized by rationalism. The creation of a good
state depends on its being governed with reason. Just as the head
governs the body, so philosophers must rule society.
Let us attempt a simple illustration of the relationship between
the three parts of man and the state:
BODY SOUL VIRTUE STATE
Head reason wisdom rulers
chest will courage auxiliaries
abdomen appetite temperance laborers
Plato’s ideal state is not unlike the old Hindu caste system, in
.which each and every person has his or her particular function for
the good of the whole. Even before Plato’s time the Hindu caste
system had the same tripartite division between the auxiliary caste
(or priest caste), the warrior caste, and the laborer caste. Nowadays
we would perhaps call Plato’s state totalitarian. But it is worth 
90
noting that he believed women could govern just as effectively as
men for the simple reason that the rulers govern by virtue of their
reason. Women, he asserted, have exactly the same powers of
reasoning as men, provided they get the same training and are
exempt from child rearing and housekeeping. In Plato’s ideal state,
rulers and warriors are not allowed family life or private property.
The rearing of children is considered too important to be left to the
individual and should be the responsibility of the state. (Plato was
the first philosopher to advocate state-organized nursery schools and
full-time education.)
After a number of significant political setbacks, Plato wrote the
tows, in which he described the “constitutional state” as the nextbest state. He now reintroduced both private property and family
ties. Women’s freedom thus became more restricted. However, he
did say that a state that does not educate and train women is like a
man who only trains his right arm.
All in all, we can say that Plato had a positive view of women—
considering the time he lived in. In the dialogue Symposium, he
gives a woman, the legendary priestess Diotima, the honor of having
given Socrates his philosophic insight.
So that was Plato, Sophie. His astonishing theories have been
discussed—and criticized—for more than two thousand years. The
first man to do so was one of the pupils from his own Academy. His
name was Aristotle, and he was the third great philosopher from
Athens.
I’ll say no more!
While Sophie had been reading about Plato, the sun had risen
over the woods to the east. It was peeping over the horizon just as
she was reading how one man clambered out of the cave and blinked
in the dazzling light outside.
It was almost as if she had herself emerged from an
underground cave. Sophie felt that she saw nature in a completely
different way after reading about Plato. It was rather like having
been color-blind. She had seen some shadows but had not seen the
clear ideas.
She was not sure Plato was right in everything he had said about 
91
the eternal patterns, but it was a beautiful thought that all living
things were imperfect copies of the eternal forms in the world of
ideas. Because wasn’t it true that all flowers, trees, human beings,
and animals were “imperfect”?
Everything she saw around her was so beautiful and so alive
that Sophie had to rub her eyes to really believe it. But nothing she
was looking at now would last. And yet—in a hundred years the
same flowers and the same animals would be here again. Even if
every single flower and every single animal should fade away and
be forgotten, there would be something that “recollected” how it all
looked.
Sophie gazed out at the world. Suddenly a squirrel ran up the
trunk of a pine tree. It circled the trunk a few times and disappeared
into the branches.
“I’ve seen you before!” thought Sophie. She realized that
maybe it was not the same squirrel that she had seen previously, but
she had seen the same “form.” For all she knew, Plato could have
been right. Maybe she really had seen the eternal “squirrel” before—
in the world of ideas, before her soul had taken residence in a human
body.
Could it be true that she had lived before? Had her soul existed
before it got a body to move around in? And was it really true that
she carried a little golden nugget inside her—a jewel that cannot be
corroded by time, a soul that would live on when her own body grew
old and died?
92
The Major’s Cabin
... the girl in the mirror winked with both eyes…
It was only a quarter past seven. There was no need to hurry home.
Sophie’s mother always took it easy on Sundays, so she would
probably sleep for another two hours.
Should she go a bit farther into the woods and try to find
Alberto Knox? And why had the dog snarled at her so viciously?
Sophie got up and began to walk down the path Hermes had
taken. She had the brown envelope with the pages on Plato in her
hand. Wherever the path diverged she took the wider one.
Birds were chirping everywhere—in the trees and in the air, in
bush and thicket. They were busily occupied with their morning
pursuits. They knew no difference between weekdays and Sundays.
Who had taught them to do all that? Was there a tiny computer inside
each one of them, programming them to do certain things?
The path led up over a little hill, then steeply down between tall
pine trees. The woods were so dense now that she could only see a
few yards between the trees.
Suddenly she caught sight of something glittering between the
pine trunks. It must be a little lake. The path went the other way but
Sophie picked her way among the trees. Without really knowing
why, she let her feet lead her.
The lake was no bigger than a soccer field. Over on the other
side she could see a red-painted cabin in a small clearing surrounded
by silver birches. A faint wisp of smoke was rising from the
chimney.
Sophie went down to the water’s edge. It was very muddy in
many places, but then she noticed a rowboat. It was drawn halfway
out of the water. There was a pair of oars in it.
Sophie looked around. Whatever she did, it would be
impossible to get around the lake to the red cabin without getting
her shoes soaked. She went resolutely over to the boat and pushed it
into the water. Then she climbed aboard, set the oars in the rowlocks,
and rowed across the lake. The boat soon touched the opposite bank. 
93
Sophie went ashore and tried to pull the boat up after her. The bank
was much steeper here than the opposite bank had been.
She glanced over her shoulder only once before walking up
toward the cabin.
She was quite startled at her own boldness. How did she dare
do this? She had no idea. It was as if “something” impelled her.
Sophie went up to the door and knocked. She waited a while
but nobody answered. She tried the handle cautiously, and the door
opened.
“Hallo!” she called. “Is anyone at home?”
She went in and found herself in a living room. She dared not
shut the door behind her.
Somebody was obviously living here. Sophie could hear wood
crackling in the old stove. Someone had been here very recently.
On a big dining table stood a typewriter, some books, a couple
of pencils, and a pile of paper. A smaller table and two chairs stood
by the window that overlooked the lake. Apart from that there was
very little furniture, although the whole of one wall was lined with
bookshelves filled with books.
Above a white chest of drawers hung a large round mirror in a
heavy brass frame. It looked very old.
On one of the walls hung two pictures. One was an oil painting
of a white house which lay a stone’s throw from a little bay with a
red boathouse. Between the house and the boathouse was a sloping
garden with an apple tree, a few thick bushes, and some rocks. A
dense fringe of birch trees framed the garden like a garland. The title
of the painting was “Bjerkely.”
Beside that painting hung an old portrait of a man sitting in a
chair by a window. He had a book in his lap. This picture also had a
little bay with trees and rocks in the background. It looked as though
it had been painted several hundred years ago. The title of the picture
was “Berkeley.” The painter’s name was Smibert.
Berkeley and Bjerkely. How strange!
Sophie continued her investigation. A door led from the living
room to a small kitchen. Someone had just done the dishes. Plates
and glasses were piled on a tea towel, some of them still glistening
with drops of soapy water. There was a tin bowl on the floor with 
94
some leftover scraps of food in it. Whoever lived here had a pet, a
dog or a cat.
Sophie went back to the living room. Another door led to a tiny
bedroom. On the floor next to the bed there were a couple of
blankets in a thick bundle. Sophie discovered some golden hairs on
the blankets. Here was the evidence! Now Sophie knew that the
occupants of the cabin were Alberto Knox and Hermes.
Back in the living room, Sophie stood in front of the mirror.
The glass was matte and scratched, and her reflection
correspondingly blurred. Sophie began to make faces at herself like
she did at home in the bathroom. Her reflection did exactly the same,
which was only to be expected.
But all of a sudden something scary happened. Just once—in
the space of a split second—Sophie saw quite clearly that the girl in
the mirror winked with both eyes. Sophie started back in fright. If
she herself had winked—how could she have seen the other girl
wink? And not only that, it seemed as though the other girl had
winked at Sophie as if to say: I can see you, Sophie. I am in here, on
the other side.
Sophie felt her heart beating, and at the same time she heard a
dog barking in the distance.
Hermes! She had to get out of here at once. Then she noticed a
green wallet on the chest of drawers under the mirror. It contained a
hundred-crown note, a fifty, and a school I.D. card. It showed a
picture of a girl with fair hair. Under the picture was the girl’s name:
Hilde Moller Knag ...
Sophie shivered. Again she heard the dog bark. She had to get
out, at once!
As she hurried past the table she noticed a white envelope
between all the books and the pile of paper. It had one word written
on it: SOPHIE.
Before she had time to realize what she was doing, she grabbed
the envelope and stuffed it into the brown envelope with the Plato
pages. Then she rushed out of the door and slammed it behind her.
The barking was getting closer. But worst of all was that the
boat was gone. After a second or two she saw it, adrift halfway
across the lake. One of the oars was floating beside it. All because 
95
she hadn’t been able to pull it completely up on land. She heard the
dog barking quite nearby now and saw movements between the trees
on the other side of the lake.
Sophie didn’t hesitate any longer. With the big envelope in her
hand, she plunged into the bushes behind the cabin. Soon she was
having to wade through marshy ground, sinking in several times to
well above her ankles. But she had to keep going. She had to get
home.
Presently she stumbled onto a path. Was it the path she had
taken earlier? She stopped to wring out her dress. And then she
began to cry.
How could she have been so stupid? The worst of all was the
boat. She couldn’t forget the sight of the row-boat with the one oar
drifting helplessly on the lake. It was all so embarrassing, so
shameful. . .
The philosophy teacher had probably reached the lake by now.
He would need the boat to get home. Sophie felt almost like a
criminal. But she hadn’t done it on purpose.
The envelope! That was probably even worse. Why had she
taken it? Because her name was on it, of course, so in a way it was
hers. But even so, she felt like a thief. And what’s more, she had
provided the evidence that it was she who had been there.
Sophie drew the note out of the envelope. It said:
What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken ?
Are we born with innate “ideas”? What is the difference
between a plant, an animal, and a human?
Why does it rain?
What does it take to live a good life?
Sophie couldn’t possibly think about these questions right now,
but she assumed they had something to do with the next philosopher.
Wasn’t he called Aristotle?
When she finally saw the hedge after running so far through the
woods it was like swimming ashore after a shipwreck. The hedge
looked funny from the other side.
She didn’t look at her watch until she had crawled into the den. 
96
It was ten-thirty. She put the big envelope into the biscuit tin with
the other papers and stuffed the note with the new questions down
her tights.
Her mother was on the telephone when she came in. When she
saw Sophie she hung up quickly. “Where on earth have you been?”
“I... went for a walk ... in the woods,” she stammered. “So I
see.”
Sophie stood silently, watching the water dripping from her
dress. “I called Joanna...”
“Joanna?”
Her mother brought her some dry clothes. Sophie only just
managed to hide the philosopher’s note. Then they sat together in
the kitchen, and her mother made some hot chocolate.
“Were you with him?” she asked after a while. “Him?”
Sophie could only think about her philosophy teacher. “With
him, yes. Him.... your rabbit!”
Sophie shook her head.
“What do you do when you’re together, Sophie? Why are you
so wet?”
Sophie sat staring gravely at the table. But deep down inside
she was laughing. Poor Mom, now she had that to worry about.
She shook her head again. Then more questions came raining
down on her.
“Now I want the truth. Were you out all night? Why did you go
to bed with your clothes on? Did you sneak out as soon as I had gone
to bed? You’re only fourteen, Sophie. I demand to know who you
are seeing!”
Sophie started to cry. Then she talked. She was still frightened,
and when you are frightened you usually talk.
She explained that she had woken up very early and had gone
for a walk in the woods. She told her mother about the cabin and the
boat, and about the mysterious mirror. But she mentioned nothing
about the secret correspondence course. Neither did she mention the
green wallet. She didn’t quite know why, but she had to keep Hilde
for herself.
Her mother put her arms around Sophie, and Sophie knew that
her mother believed her now. “I don’t have a boyfriend,” Sophie 
97
sniffed. “It was just something I said because you were so upset
about the white rabbit.”
“And you really went all the way to the major’s cabin ...” said
her mother thoughtfully. “The major’s cabin?” Sophie stared at her
mother.
“The little woodland cabin is called the major’s cabin because
some years ago an army major lived there for a time. He was rather
eccentric, a little crazy, I think. But never mind that. Since then the
cabin has been unoccupied.”
“But it isn’t! There’s a philosopher living there now.” “Oh stop,
don’t start fantasizing again!”
Sophie stayed in her room, thinking about what had happened.
Her head felt like a roaring circus full of lumbering elephants, silly
clowns, daring trapeze flyers, and trained monkeys. But one image
recurred unceasingly— a small rowboat with one oar drifting in a
lake deep in the woods—and someone needing the boat to get home.
She felt sure that the philosophy teacher didn’t wish her any
harm, and would certainly forgive her if he knew she had been to his
cabin. But she had broken an agreement. That was all the thanks he
got for taking on her philosophic education. How could she make up
for it? Sophie took out her pink notepaper and began to write:
Dear Philosopher, It was me who was in your cabin early
Sunday morning. I wanted so much to meet you and discuss some
of the philosophic problems. For the moment I am a Plato fan, but I
am not so sure he was right about ideas or pattern pictures existing
in another reality. Of course they exist in our souls, but I think—for
the moment anyway— that this is a different thing. I have to admit
too that I am not altogether convinced of the immortality of the soul.
Personally, I have no recollections from my former lives. If you
could convince me that my deceased grandmother’s soul is happy in
the world of ideas, I would be most grateful.
Actually, it was not for philosophic reasons that I started to
write this letter (which I shall put in a pink envelope with a lump of
sugar). I just wanted to say I was sorry for being disobedient. I tried
to pull the boat completely up on shore but I was obviously not
strong enough. Or perhaps a big wave dragged the boat out again.
I hope you managed to get home without getting your feet wet. 
98
If not, it might comfort you to know that I got soaked and will
probably have a terrible cold. But that’ll be my own fault.
I didn’t touch anything in the cabin, but I am sorry to say that I
couldn’t resist the temptation to take the envelope that was on the
table. It wasn’t because I wanted to steal anything, but as my name
was on it, I thought in my confusion that it belonged to me. I am
really and truly sorry, and I promise never to disappoint you again.
P.S. I will think all the new questions through very carefully,
starting now.
P.P.S. Is the mirror with the brass frame above the white chest
of drawers an ordinary mirror or a magic mirror? I’m only asking
because I am not used to seeing my own reflection wink with both
eyes.
With regards from your sincerely interested pupil, SOPHIE
Sophie read the letter through twice before she put it in the
envelope. She thought it was less formal than the previous letter she
had written. Before she went downstairs to the kitchen to get a lump
of sugar she looked at the note with the day’s questions:
“What came first—the chicken or the “idea” chicken?
This question was just as tricky as the old riddle of the chicken
and the egg. There would be no chicken without the egg, and no egg
without the chicken. Was it really just as complicated to figure out
whether the chicken or the “idea” chicken came first? Sophie
understood what Plato meant. He meant that the “idea” chicken had
existed in the world of ideas long before chickens existed in the
sensory world. According to Plato, the soul had “seen” the “idea”
chicken before it took up residence in a body. But wasn’t this just
where Sophie thought Plato must be mistaken? How could a person
who had never seen a live chicken or a picture of a chicken ever
have any “idea” of a chicken? Which brought her to the next
question:
Are we born with innate “ideas”? Most unlikely, thought
Sophie. She could hardly imagine a newborn baby being especially
well equipped with ideas. One could obviously never be sure,
because the fact that the baby had no language did not necessarily
mean that it had no ideas in its head. But surely we have to see things
in the world before we can know anything about them.
99
“What is the difference between a plant, an animal, and a
human?” Sophie could immediately see very clear differences.
For instance, she did not think a plant had a very complicated
emotional life. Who had ever heard of a bluebell with a broken
heart? A plant grows, takes nourishment, and produces seeds so that
it can reproduce itself. That’s about all one could say about plants.
Sophie concluded that everything that applied to plants also applied
to animals and humans. But animals had other attributes as well.
They could move, for example. (When did a rose ever run a
marathon?) It was a bit harder to point to any differences between
animals and humans. Humans could think, but couldn’t animals do
so as well?
Sophie was convinced that her cat Sherekan could think. At
least, it could be very calculating. But could it reflect on
philosophical questions? Could a cat speculate about the difference
between a plant, an animal, and a human? Hardly! A cat could
probably be either contented or unhappy, but did it ever ask itself if
there was a God or whether it had an immortal soul? Sophie thought
that was extremely doubtful. But the same problem was raised here
as with the baby and the innate ideas. It was just as difficult to talk
to a cat about such questions as it would be to discuss them with a
baby.
“Why does it rain?” Sophie shrugged her shoulders. It probably
rains because seawater evaporates and the clouds condense into
raindrops. Hadn’t she learnt that in the third grade? Of course, one
could always say that it rains so that plants and animals can grow.
But was that true? Had a shower any actual purpose?
The last question definitely had something to do with purpose:
“What does it take to live a good life?”
The philosopher had written something about this quite early
on in the course. Everybody needs food, warmth, love, and care.
Such basics were the primary condition for a good life, at any rate.
Then he had pointed out that people also needed to find answers to
certain philosophical questions. It was probably also quite important
to have a job you liked. If you hated traffic, for instance, you would
not be very happy as a taxi driver. And if you hated doing homework
it would probably be a bad idea to become a teacher. Sophie loved 
100
animals and wanted to be a vet. But in any case she didn’t think it
was necessary to win a million in the lottery to live a good life.
Quite the opposite, more likely. There was a saying: The devil
finds work for idle hands.
Sophie stayed in her room until her mother called her down to
a big midday meal. She had prepared sirloin steak and baked
potatoes. There were cloudberries and cream for dessert.
They talked about all kinds of things. Sophie’s mother asked
her how she wanted to celebrate her fifteenth birthday. It was only a
few weeks away.
Sophie shrugged.
“Aren’t you going to invite anyone? I mean, don’t you want to
have a party?” “Maybe.”
“We could ask Martha and Anne Marie ... and Helen. And
Joanna, of course. And Jeremy, perhaps. But that’s for you to decide.
I remember my own fifteenth birthday so clearly, you know. It
doesn’t seem all that long ago. I felt I was already quite grown up.
Isn’t it odd, Sophie! I don’t feel I have changed at all since then.”
“You haven’t. Nothing changes. You have just developed,
gotten older...”
“Mm ... that was a very grownup thing to say. I just think it’s
all happened so very quickly.”
101
Aristotle
...a meticulous organizer who
wanted to clarify our concepts …
While her mother was taking her afternoon nap, Sophie went
down to the den. She had put a lump of sugar in the pink envelope
and written “To Alberto” on the outside.
There was no new letter, but after a few minutes Sophie heard
the dog approaching.
“Hermes!” she called, and the next moment he had pushed his
way into the den with a big brown envelope in his mouth.
“Good boy!” Sophie put her arm around the dog, which was
snorting and snuffling like a walrus. She took the pink envelope with
the lump of sugar and put it in the dog’s mouth. He crawled through
the hedge and made off into the woods again.
Sophie opened the big envelope apprehensively, wondering
whether it would contain anything about the cabin and the boat.
It contained the usual typed pages held together with a
paperclip. But there was also a loose page inside. On it was written:
Dear Miss Sleuth, or, to be more exact, Miss Burglar. The case
has already been handed over to the police.
Not really. No, I’m not angry. If you are just as curious
when it comes to discovering answers to the riddles of
102
philosophy, I’d say your adventure was very promising. It’s just
a little annoying that I’ll have to move now. Still, I have no one
to blame but myself, I suppose. I might have known you were a
person who would always want to get to the bottom of things.
Greetings, Alberto
Sophie was relieved. So he was not angry after all. But why
would he have to move?
She took the papers and ran up to her room. It would be prudent
to be in the house when her mother woke up. Lying comfortably on
her bed, she began to read about Aristotle.
PHILOSOPHER AND SCIENTIST
Dear Sophie:
You were probably astonished by Plato’s theory or ideas. You
are not the only one! I do not know whether you swallowed the
whole thing—hook, line, and sinker—or whether you had any
critical comments. But if you did have, you can be sure that the selfsame criticism was raised by Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who was a
pupil at Plato’s Academy for almost twenty years.
Aristotle was not a native of Athens. He was born in Macedonia
and came to Plato’s Academy when Plato was 61. Aristotle’s father
was a respected physician— and therefore a scientist. This
background already tells us something about Aristotle’s philosophic
project.
What he was most interested in was nature study. He was not
only the last of the great Greek philosophers, he was Europe’s first
great biologist.
Taking it to extremes, we could say that Plato was so engrossed
in his eternal forms, or “ideas,” that he took very little notice of the
changes in nature. Aristotle, on the other hand, was preoccupied
with just these changes—or with what we nowadays describe as
natural processes.
To exaggerate even more, we could say that Plato turned his
back on the sensory world and shut his eyes to everything we see
around us. (He wanted to escape from the cave and look out over the 
103
eternal world of ideas!) Aristotle did the opposite: he got down on
all fours and studied frogs and fish, anemones and poppies.
While Plato used his reason, Aristotle used his senses as well.
We find decisive differences between the two, not least in their
writing. Plato was a poet and mythologist; Aristotle’s writings were
as dry and precise as an encyclopedia. On the other hand, much of
what he wrote was based on up-to-the-minute field studies.
Records from antiquity refer to 170 titles supposedly written by
Aristotle. Of these, 47 are preserved. These are not complete books;
they consist largely of lecture notes. In his time, philosophy was still
mainly an oral activity.
The significance of Aristotle in European culture is due not
least to the fact that he created the terminology that scientists use
today. He was the great organizer who founded and classified the
various sciences.
Since Aristotle wrote on all the sciences, I will limit myself to
some of the most important areas. Now that I have told you such a
lot about Plato, you must start by hearing how Aristotle refuted
Plato’s theory of ideas. Later we will look at the way he formulated
his own natural philosophy, since it was Aristotle who summed up
what the natural philosophers before him had said. We’ll see how
he categorizes our concepts and founds the discipline of Logic as a
science. And finally I’ll tell you a little about Aristotle’s view of
man and society.
No Innate Ideas
Like the philosophers before him, Plato wanted to find the
eternal and immutable in the midst of all change. So he found the
perfect ideas that were superior to the sensory world.
Plato furthermore held that ideas were more real than all the
phenomena of nature. First came the idea “horse,” then came all the
sensory world’s horses trotting along like shadows on a cave wall.
The idea “chicken” came before both the chicken and the egg.
Aristotle thought Plato had turned the whole thing upside
down. He agreed with his teacher that the particular horse “flows”
and that no horse lives forever. He also agreed that the actual form 
104
of the horse is eternal and immutable. But the “idea” horse was
simply a concept that we humans had formed after seeing a certain
number of horses. The “idea” or “form” horse thus had no existence
of its own. To Aristotle, the “idea” or the “form” horse was made up
of the horse’s characteristics—which define what we today call the
horse species.
To be more precise: by “form” horse, Aristotle meant that
which is common to all horses.
And here the metaphor of the gingerbread mold does not hold
up because the mold exists independently of the particular
gingerbread cookies. Aristotle did not believe in the existence of any
such molds or forms that, as it were, lay on their own shelf beyond
the natural world. On the contrary, to Aristotle the “forms” were in
the things, because they were the particular characteristics of these
things.
So Aristotle disagreed with Plato that the “idea” chicken came
before the chicken. What Aristotle called the “form” chicken is
present in every single chicken as the chicken’s particular set
characteristics—for one, that it lays eggs. The real chicken and the
“form” chicken are thus just as inseparable as body and soul.
And that is really the essence of Aristotle’s criticism of Plato’s
theory of ideas. But you should not ignore the fact that this was a
dramatic turn of thought. The highest degree of reality, in Plato’s
theory, was that which we think with our reason. It was equally
apparent to Aristotle that the highest degree of reality is that which
we perceive with our senses. Plato thought that all the things we see
in the natural world were purely reflections of things that ex- isted
in the higher reality of the world of ideas—and thereby in the human
soul. Aristotle thought the opposite: things that are in the human soul
were purely reflections of natural objects. So nature is the real world.
According to Aristotle, Plato was trapped in a mythical world
picture in which the human imagination was confused with the real
world.
Aristotle pointed out that nothing exists in consciousness that
has not first been experienced by the senses. Plato would have said
that there is nothing in the natural world that has not first existed in
the world of ideas. Aristotle held that Plato was thus “doubling the 
105
number of things.” He explained a horse by referring to the “idea”
horse. But what kind of an explanation is that, Sophie? Where does
the “idea” horse come from, is my question. Might there not even
be a third horse, which the “idea” horse is just an imitation of?
Aristotle held that all our thoughts and ideas have come into
our consciousness through what we have heard and seen. But we
also have an innate power of reason. We have no innate ideas, as
Plato held, but we have the innate faculty of organizing all sensory
impressions into categories and classes. This is how concepts such
as “stone,” “plant,” “animal,” and “human” arise. Similarly there
arise concepts like “horse,” “lobster,” and “canary.”
Aristotle did not deny that humans have innate reason. On the
contrary, it is precisely reason, according to Aristotle, that is man’s
most distinguishing characteristic. But our reason is completely
empty until we have sensed something. So man has no innate
“ideas.”
The Form of a Thing Is Its Specific Characteristics
Having come to terms with Plato’s theory of ideas, Aristotle decided
that reality consisted of various separate things that constitute a
unity of form and substance. The “substance” is what things are
made of, while the “form” is each thing’s specific characteristics.
A chicken is fluttering about in front of you, Sophie. The
chicken’s “form” is precisely that it flutters—and that it cackles and
lays eggs. So by the “form” of a chicken, we mean the specific
characteristics of its species—or in other words, what it does. When
the chicken dies—and cackles no more—its “form” ceases to exist.
The only thing that remains is the chicken’s “substance” (sadly
enough, Sophie), but then it is no longer a chicken.
As I said earlier, Aristotle was concerned with the changes in
nature. “Substance” always contains the potentiality to realize a
specific “form.” We could say that “substance” always strives
toward achieving an innate potentiality. Every change in nature,
according to Aristotle, is a transformation of substance from the
“potential” to the “actual.”
Yes, I’ll explain what I mean, Sophie. See if this funny story 
106
helps you. A sculptor is working on a large block of granite. He
hacks away at the formless block every day. One day a little boy
comes by and says, “What are you looking for?”
“Wait and see,” answers the sculptor. After a few days the little
boy comes back, and now the sculptor has carved a beautiful horse
out of the granite. The boy stares at it in amazement, then he turns
to the sculptor and says, “How did you know it was in there?”
How indeed! In a sense, the sculptor had seen the horse’s form
in the block of granite, because that particular block of granite had
the potentiality to be formed into the shape or a horse. Similarly
Aristotle believed that everything in nature has the potentiality of
realizing, or achieving, a specific “form.”
Let us return to the chicken and the egg. A chicken’s egg has
the potentiality to become a chicken. This does not mean that all
chicken’s eggs become chickens—many of them end up on the
breakfast table as fried eggs, omelettes, or scrambled eggs, without
ever having realized their potentiality. But it is equally obvious that
a chicken’s egg cannot become a goose. That potentiality is not
within a chicken’s egg. The “form” of a thing, then, says something
about its limitation as well as its potentiality.
When Aristotle talks about the “substance” and “form” of
things, he does not only refer to living organisms. Just as it is the
chicken’s “form” to cackle, flutter its wings, and lay eggs, it is the
form of the stone to fall to the ground. Just as the chicken cannot
help cackling, the stone cannot help falling to the ground. You can,
of course, lift a stone and hurl it high into the air, but because it is
the stone’s nature to fall to the ground, you cannot hurl it to the
moon. (Take care when you perform this experiment, because the
stone might take revenge and find the shortest route back to the
earth!)
The Final Cause
Before we leave the subject of all living and dead things having
a “form” that says something about their potential “action,” I must
add that Aristotle had a remarkable view of causality in nature.
Today when we talk about the “cause” of anything, we mean 
107
how it came to happen. The windowpane was smashed because
Peter hurled a stone through it; a shoe is made because the
shoemaker sews pieces of leather together. But Aristotle held that
there were different types of cause in nature. Altogether he named
four different causes. It is important to understand what he meant by
what he called the “final cause.”
In the case of window smashing, it is quite reasonable to ask
why Peter threw the stone. We are thus asking what his purpose was.
There can be no doubt that purpose played a role, also, in the matter
of the shoe being made. But Aristotle also took into account a similar
“purpose” when considering the purely lifeless processes in nature.
Here’s an example:
Why does it rain, Sophie? You have probably learned at school
that it rains because the moisture in the clouds cools and condenses
into raindrops that are drawn to the earth by the force of gravity.
Aristotle would have nodded in agreement. But he would have
added that so far you have only mentioned three of the causes. The
“material cause” is that the moisture (the clouds) was there at the
precise moment when the air cooled. The “efficient cause” is that
the moisture cools, and the “formal cause” is that the “form,” or
nature of the water, is to fall to the earth. But if you stopped there,
Aristotle would add that it rains because plants and animals need
rainwater in order to grow. This he called the “final cause.” Aristotle
assigns the raindrops a life-task, or “purpose.”
We would probably turn the whole thing upside down and say
that plants grow because they find moisture. You can see the
difference, can’t you, Sophie? Aristotle believed that there is a
purpose behind everything in nature. It rains so that plants can grow;
oranges and grapes grow so that people can eat them.
That is not the nature of scientific reasoning today. We say that
food and water are necessary conditions of life for man and beast.
Had we not had these conditions we would not have existed. But it
is not the purpose of water or oranges to be food for us.
In the question of causality then, we are tempted to say that
Aristotle was wrong. But let us not be too hasty. Many people
believe that God created the world as it is so that all His creatures
could live in it. Viewed in this way, it can naturally be claimed that 
108
there is water in the rivers because animals and humans need water
to live. But now we are talking about God’s purpose. The raindrops
and the waters of the river have no interest in our welfare.
Logic
The distinction between “form” and “substance” plays an
important part in Aristotle’s explanation of the way we discern
things in the world.
When we discern things, we classify them in various groups or
categories. I see a horse, then I see another horse, and another. The
horses are not exactly alike, but they have something in common,
and this common something is the horse’s “form.” Whatever might
be distinctive, or individual, belongs to the horse’s “substance.”
So we go around pigeonholing everything. We put cows in
cowsheds, horses in stables, pigs in pigsties, and chickens in chicken
coops. The same happens when Sophie Amundsen tidies up her
room. She puts her books on the bookshelf, her schoolbooks in her
schoolbag, and her magazines in the drawer. Then she folds her
clothes neatly and puts them in the closet—underwear on one shelf,
sweaters on another, and socks in a drawer on their own.
Notice that we do the same thing in our minds. We distinguish
between things made of stone, things made of wool, and things made
of rubber. We distinguish between things that are alive or dead, and
we distinguish between vegetable, animal, and human.
Do you see, Sophie? Aristotle wanted to do a thorough clearing
up in nature’s “room.” He tried to show that everything in nature
belongs to different categories and subcategories. (Hermes is a live
creature, more specifically an animal, more specifically a vertebrate,
more specifically a mammal, more specifically a dog, more
specifically a Labrador, more specifically a male Labrador.)
Go into your room, Sophie. Pick up something, anything, from
the floor. Whatever you take, you will find that what you are holding
belongs to a higher category The day you see something you are
unable to classify you will get a shock. If, for example, you discover
a small whatsit, and you can’t really say whether it is animal,
vegetable, or mineral—I don’t think you would dare touch it.
109
Saying animal, vegetable, and mineral reminds me of that party
game where the victim is sent outside the room, and when he comes
in again he has to guess what everyone else is thinking of. Everyone
has agreed to think of Fluffy, the cat, which at the moment is in the
neighbor’s garden. The victim comes in and begins to guess. The
others must only answer “yes” or “no.” If the victim is a good
Aristotelian—and therefore no victim—the game could go pretty
much as follows:
Is it concrete? (Yes!) Mineral? (No!) Is it alive? (Yes!)
Vegetable? (No!) Animal? (Yes!) Is it a bird? (No!) Is it a mammal?
(Yes!) Is it the whole animal? (Yes!) Is it a cat? (Yes!) Is it Fluffy?
(Yeah! Laughter. . .)
So Aristotle invented that game. We ought to give Plato the
credit for having invented hide-and-seek. Democritus has already
been credited with having invented Lego.
Aristotle was a meticulous organizer who set out to clarify our
concepts. In fact, he founded the science of Logic. He demonstrated
a number of laws governing conclusions or proofs that were valid.
One example will suffice. If I first establish that “all living creatures
are mortal” (first premise), and then establish that “Hermes is a
living creature” (second premise), I can then elegantly conclude that
“Hermes is mortal.”
The example demonstrates that Aristotle’s logic was based on
the correlation of terms, in this case “living creature” and “mortal.”
Even though one has to admit that the above conclusion is 100%
valid, we may also add that it hardly tells us anything new. We
already knew that Hermes was “mortal.” (He is a “dog” and all dogs
are “living creatures”—which are “mortal,” unlike the rock of
Mount Everest.) Certainly we knew that, Sophie. But the
relationship between classes of things is not always so obvious.
From time to time it can be necessary to clarify our concepts.
For example: Is it really possible that tiny little baby mice
suckle just like lambs and piglets? Mice certainly do not lay eggs.
(When did I last see a mouse’s egg?) So they give birth to live
young—just like pigs and sheep. But we call animals that bear live
young mammals— and mammals are animals that feed on their
mother’s milk. So—we got there. We had the answer inside us but 
110
we had to think it through. We forgot for the moment that mice
really do suckle from their mother. Perhaps it was because we have
never seen a baby mouse being suckled, for the simple reason that
mice are rather shy of humans when they suckle their young.
Nature’s Scale
When Aristotle “clears up” in life, he first of all points out that
everything in the natural world can be divided into two main
categories. On the one hand there are nonliving things, such as
stones, drops of water, or clumps of soil. These things have no
potentiality for change. According to Aristotle, nonliving things can
only change through external influence. Only living things have the
potentiality for change.
Aristotle divides “living things” into two different categories.
One comprises plants, and the other creatures. Finally, these
“creatures” can also be divided into two subcategories, namely
animals and humans.
You have to admit that Aristotle’s categories are clear and
simple. There is a decisive difference between a living and a
nonliving thing, for example a rose and a stone, just as there is a
decisive difference between a plant and an animal, for example a
rose and a horse. I would also claim that there definitely is a
difference between a horse and a man. But what exactly does this
difference consist of? Can you tell me that?
Unfortunately I do not have time to wait while you write the
answer down and put it in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar, so
I’ll answer myself. When Aristotle divides natural phenomena into
various categories, his criterion is the object’s characteristics, or
more specifically what it can do or what it does.
All living things (plants, animals, humans) have the ability to
absorb nourishment, to grow, and to propagate. All “living
creatures” (animals and humans) have in addition the ability to
perceive the world around them and to move about. Moreover, all
humans have the ability to think—or otherwise to order their
perceptions into various categories and classes.
So there are in reality no sharp boundaries in the natural 
111
world. We observe a gradual transition from simple growths to more
complicated plants, from simple animals to more complicated
animals. At the top of this “scale” is man—who according to
Aristotle lives the whole life of nature. Man grows and absorbs
nourishment like plants, he has feelings and the ability to move like
animals, but he also has a specific characteristic peculiar to humans,
and that is the ability to think rationally.
Therefore, man has a spark of divine reason, Sophie. Yes, I did
say divine. From time to time Aristotle reminds us that there must
be a God who started all movement in the natural world. Therefore
God must be at the very top of nature’s scale.
Aristotle imagined the movement of the stars and the planets
guiding all movement on Earth. But there had to e something
causing the heavenly bodies to move. Aristotle called this the “first
mover,” or “God.” The “first mover” is itself at rest, but it is the
“formal cause” of the movement of the heavenly bodies, and thus of
all movement in nature.
Ethics
Let us go back to man, Sophie. According to Aristotle, man’s “form”
comprises a soul, which has a plant-like part, an animal part, and a
rational part. And now he asks: How should we live? What does it
require to live a good life? His answer: Man can only achieve
happiness by using all his abilities and capabilities.
Aristotle held that there are three forms of happiness. The first
form of happiness is a life of pleasure and enjoyment. The second
form of happiness is a life as a free and responsible citizen. The third
form of happiness is a life as thinker and philosopher.
Aristotle then emphasized that all three criteria must be present
at the same time for man to find happiness and fulfillment. He
rejected all forms of imbalance. Had he lived today he might have
said that a person who only develops his body lives a life that is just
as unbalanced as someone who only uses his head. Both extremes
are an expression of a warped way of life.
The same applies in human relationships, where Aristotle
advocated the “Golden Mean.” We must be neither cowardly nor 
112
rash, but courageous (too little courage is cowardice, too much is
rashness), neither miserly nor extravagant but liberal (not liberal
enough is miserly, too liberal is extravagant). The same goes for
eating. It is dangerous to eat too little, but also dangerous to eat too
much. The ethics of both Plato and Aristotle contain echoes of Greek
medicine: only by exercising balance and temperance will I achieve
a happy or “harmonious” life.
Politics
The undesirability of cultivating extremes is also expressed in
Aristotle’s view of society. He says that man is by nature a “political
animal.” Without a society around us, we are not real people, he
claimed. He pointed out that the family and the village satisfy our
primary needs of food, warmth, marriage, and child rearing. But the
highest form of human fellowship is only to be found in the state.
This leads to the question of how the state should be organized.
(You remember Plato’s “philosophic state”?) Aristotle describes
three good forms of constitution.
One is monarchy, or kingship—which means there is only one
head of state. For this type of constitution to be good, it must not
degenerate into “tyranny”—that is, when one ruler governs the state
to his own advantage. Another good form of constitution is
aristocracy, in which there is a larger or smaller group of rulers. This
constitutional form must beware of degenerating into an
“oligarchy”—when the government is run by a few people. An
example of that would be a junta. The third good constitutional form
is what Aristotle called polity, which means democracy. But this
form also has its negative aspect. A democracy can quickly develop
into mob rule. (Even if the tyrannic Hitler had not become head of
state in Germany, all the lesser Nazis could have formed a terrifying
mob rule.)
Views on Women
Finally, let us look at Aristotle’s views on women. His was
unfortunately not as uplifting as Plato’s. Aristotle was more inclined 
113
to believe that women were incomplete in some way. A woman was
an “unfinished man.” In reproduction, woman is passive and
receptive whilst man is active and productive; for the child inherits
only the male characteristics, claimed Aristotle.
He believed that all the child’s characteristics lay complete in
the male sperm. The woman was the soil, receiving and bringing
forth the seed, whilst the man was the “sower.” Or, in Aristotelian
language, the man provides the “form” and the woman contributes
the “substance.”
It is of course both astonishing and highly regrettable that an
otherwise so intelligent man could be so wrong about the
relationship of the sexes. But it demonstrates two things: first, that
Aristotle could not have had much practical experience regarding
the lives of women and chil- dren, and second, it shows how wrong
things can go when men are allowed to reign supreme in the fields
of philosophy and science.
Aristotle’s erroneous view of the sexes was doubly harmful
because it was his—rather than Plato’s—view that held sway
throughout the Middle Ages. The church thus inherited a view of
women that is entirely without foundation in the Bible. Jesus was
certainly no woman hater!
I’ll say no more. But you will be hearing from me again.
When Sophie had read the chapter on Aristotle one and a half
times, she returned it to the brown envelope and remained sitting,
staring into space. She suddenly became aware of the mess
surrounding her. Books and ring binders lay scattered on the floor.
Socks and sweaters, tights and jeans hung half out of the closet. On
the chair in front of the writing desk was a huge pile of dirty laundry.
Sophie had an irresistible desire to clear up. The first thing she
did was to pull all the clothes out of the closet and onto the floor. It
was necessary to start all over. Then she began folding her things
very neatly and stacking them all tidily on the shelves. The closet
had seven shelves. One was for underwear, one for socks and tights,
and one for jeans. She gradually filled up each shelf. She never had
any question about where to put anything. Dirty laundry went into a
plastic bag she found on the bottom shelf. One thing she did have
trouble with—a white knee-length stocking. The problem was that 
114
the other one of the pair was missing. What’s more, it had never
been Sophie’s.
She examined it carefully. There was nothing to identify the
owner, but Sophie had a strong suspicion about who the owner was.
She threw it up onto the top shelf to join the Lego, the video cassette,
and the red silk scarf.
Sophie turned her attention to the floor. She sorted books, ring
binders, magazines, and posters— exactly as the philosophy teacher
had described in the chapter on Aristotle. When she had done that,
she made her bed and got started on her writing desk.
The last thing she did was to gather all the pages on Aristotle
into a neat pile. She fished out an empty ring binder and a hole
punch, made holes in the pages, and clipped them into the ring
binder. This also went onto the top shelf. Later on in the day she
would have to bring in the cookie tin from the den.
From now on things would be kept neat. And she didn’t only
mean in her room. After reading Aristotle, she realized it was just as
important to keep her ideas orderly. She had reserved the top shelf
of the closet especially for that kind of thing. It was the only place
in the room that she did not yet have complete control over.
There had been no sign of life from her mother for over two
hours. Sophie went downstairs.
Before she woke her mother up she decided to feed her pets.
She bent over the goldfish bowl in the kitchen. One of the fishes
was black, one orange, and one red and white. This was why she
called them Black Jack, Gold-top, and Red Ridinghood.
As she sprinkled fish food into the water she said:
“You belong to Nature’s living creatures, you can absorb
nourishment, you can grow and reproduce yourselves. More
specifically, you belong to the animal kingdom. So you can move
around and look out at the world. To be precise, you are fish, and
you breathe through your gills and can swim back and forth in the
waters of life.”
Sophie put the lid back on the fish food jar. She was quite
satisfied with the way she had placed the goldfish in Nature’s scale,
and she was especially pleased with the expression “the waters of
life.” So now it was the budgerigars’ turn.
115
Sophie poured a little birdseed in their feeding cup and said:
“Dear Smit and Smule. You have become dear little
budgerigars because you grew out of dear little budgerigar eggs, and
because these eggs had the form of being budgerigars, luckily you
didn’t grow into squawking parrots.”
Sophie then went into the large bathroom, where the sluggish
tortoise lay in a big box. Every now and then when her mother
showered, she yelled that she would kill it one day. But so far it had
been an empty threat. Sophie took a lettuce leaf from a large jam jar
and laid it in the box.
“Dear Govinda,” she said. “You are not one of the speediest
animals, but you certainly are able to sense a tiny fraction of the
great big world we live in. You’ll have to content yourself with the
fact that you are not the only one who can’t exceed your own limits.”
Sherekan was probably out catching mice—that was a cat’s
nature, after all. Sophie crossed the living room toward her mother’s
bedroom. A vase of daffodils stood on the coffee table. It was as if
the yellow blooms bowed respectfully as Sophie went by. She
stopped for a moment and let her fingers gently brush their smooth
heads. “You belong to the living part of nature too,” she said.
“Actually, you are quite privileged compared to the vase you are in.
But unfortunately you are not able to appreciate it.”
Then Sophie tiptoed into her mother’s bedroom. Although her
mother was in a deep sleep, Sophie laid a hand on her forehead.
“You are one of the luckiest ones,” she said, “because you are
not only alive like the lilies of the field. And you are not only a living
creature like Sherekan or Govinda. You are a human, and therefore
have the rare capacity of thought.”
“What on earth are you talking about, Sophie?” Her mother had
woken up more quickly than usual.
“I was just saying that you look like a lazy tortoise. I can
otherwise inform you that I have tidied up my room, with
philosophic thoroughness.”
Her mother lifted her head.
“I’ll be right there,” she said. “Will you put the coffee on?”
Sophie did as she was asked, and they were soon sitting in the
kitchen over coffee, juice, and chocolate.
116
Suddenly Sophie said, “Have you ever wondered why we are
alive, Mom?” “Oh, not again!”
“Yes, because now I know the answer. People live on this
planet so that someone can go around giving names to everything.”
“Is that right? I never thought of that.”
“Then you have a big problem, because a human is a thinking
animal. If you don’t think, you’re not really a human.”
“Sophie!”
“Imagine if there were only vegetables and animals. Then there
wouldn’t have been anybody to tell the difference between ‘cat’ and
‘dog,’ or ‘lily’ and ‘gooseberry.’ Vegetables and animals are living
too, but we are the only creatures that can categorize nature into
different groups and classes.”
“You really are the most peculiar girl I have ever had,” said her
mother.
“I should hope so,” said Sophie. “Everybody is more or less
peculiar. I am a person, so I am more or less peculiar. You have only
one girl, so I am the most peculiar.”
“What I meant was that you scare the living daylights out of me
with all that new talk.” “You are easily scared, then.”
Later that afternoon Sophie went back to the den. She managed
to smuggle the big cookie tin up to her room without her mother
noticing.
First she put all the pages in the right order. Then she punched
holes in them and put them in the ring binder, before the chapter on
Aristotle. Finally she numbered each page in the top right-hand
corner. There were in all over fifty pages. Sophie was in the process
of compiling her own book on philosophy. It was not by her, but
written especially for her.
She had no time to do her homework for Monday. They were
probably going to have a test in Religious Knowledge, but the
teacher always said he valued personal commitment and value
judgments. Sophie felt she was beginning to have a certain basis for
both.
117
Hellenism
... a spark from the fire…
Although the philosophy teacher had begun sending his letters
directly to the old hedge, Sophie nevertheless looked in the mailbox
on Monday morning, more out of habit than anything else.
It was empty, not surprisingly. She began to walk down Clover
Close.
Suddenly she noticed a photograph lying on the sidewalk. It
was a picture of a white jeep and a blue flag with the letters UN on
it. Wasn’t that the United Nations flag?
Sophie turned the picture over and saw that it was a regular
postcard. To “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen ...” It had
a Norwegian stamp and was postmarked “UN Battalion” Friday
June 15, 1990.
June 15! That was Sofie’s birthday!
The card read:
Dear Hilde,
I assume you are still celebrating your 15th birthday. Or is this
the morning after?
Anyway, it makes no difference to your present. In a sense, that
will last a lifetime. But I’d like to wish you a happy birthday one
more time. Perhaps you understand now why I send the cards to
Sophie. I am sure she will pass them on to you.
118
P.S. Mom said you had lost your wallet. I hereby promise to
reimburse you the 150 crowns. You will probably be able to get
another school I.D. before they close for the summer vacation.
Love from Dad.
Sophie stood glued to the spot. When was the previous card
postmarked? She seemed to recall that the postcard of the beach was
also postmarked June—even though it was a whole month off. She
simply hadn’t looked properly.
She glanced at her watch and then ran back to the house. She
would just have to be late for school today!
Sophie let herself in and leaped upstairs to her room. She found
the first postcard to Hilde under the red silk scarf. Yes! It was also
postmarked June 15! Sophie’s birthday and the day before the
summer vacation.
Her mind was racing as she ran over to the supermarket to meet
Joanna.
Who was Hilde? How could her father as good as take it for
granted that Sophie would find her?
In any case, it was senseless of him to send Sophie the cards
instead of sending them directly to his daughter. It could not
possibly be because he didn’t know his own daughter’s address.
Was it a practical joke? Was he trying to surprise his daughter on
her birthday by getting a perfect stranger to play detective and
mailman? Was that why she was being given a month’s headstart?
And was using her as the go-between a way of giving his daughter
a new girlfriend as a birthday present? Could she be the present that
would “last a lifetime”?
If this joker really was in Lebanon, how had he gotten hold of
Sophie’s address? Also, Sophie and Hilde had at least two things in
common. If Hilde’s birthday was June 15, they were both born on
the same day. And they both had fathers who were on the other side
of the globe.
Sophie felt she was being drawn into an unnatural world.
Maybe it was not so dumb after all to believe in fate. Still—she
shouldn’t be jumping to conclusions; it could all have a perfectly 
119
natural explanation. But how had Alberto Knox found Hilde’s wallet
when Hilde lived in Lillesand? Lillesand was hundreds of miles
away. And why had Sophie found this postcard on her sidewalk?
Did it fall out of the mailman’s bag just as he got to Sophie’s
mailbox? If so, why should he drop this particular card?
“Are you completely insane?” Joanna burst out when Sophie
finally made it to the supermarket.
“Sorry!”
Joanna frowned at her severely, like a schoolteacher.
“You’d better have a good explanation.”
“It has to do with the UN,” said Sophie. “I was detained by
hostile troops in Lebanon.”
“Sure ... You’re just in love!”
They ran to school as fast as their legs could carry them.
The Religious Knowledge test that Sophie had not had time to
prepare for was given out in the third period. The sheet read:
Philosophy of Life and Tolerance
1. Make a list of things we can know. Then make a list of
things we can only believe.
2. Indicate some of the factors contributing to a person’s
philosophy of life.
3. What is meant by conscience? Do you think conscience
is the same for everyone?
4. What is meant by priority of values?
Sophie sat thinking for a long time before she started to write.
Could she use any of the ideas she had learned from Alberto Knox?
She was going to have to, because she had not opened her Religious
Knowledge book for days. Once she began to write, the words
simply flowed from her pen.
She wrote that we know the moon is not made of green cheese
and that there are also craters on the dark side of the moon, that both
Socrates and Jesus were sentenced to death, that everybody has to 
120
die sooner or later, that the great temples on the Acropolis were built
after the Persian wars in the fifth century B.C. and that the most
important oracle in ancient Greece was the oracle at Delphi. As
examples of what we can only believe, Sophie mentioned the
questions of whether or not there is life on other planets, whether
God exists or not, whether there is life after death, and whether Jesus
was the son of God or merely a wise man. “We can certainly not
know where the world came from,” she wrote, com- pleting her list.
“The universe can be compared to a large rabbit pulled out of a top
hat. Philosophers try to climb up one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s
fur and stare straight into the eyes of the Great Magician. Whether
they will ever succeed is an open question. But if each philosopher
climbed onto another one’s back, they would get even higher up in
the rabbit’s fur, and then, in my opinion, there would be some
chance they would make it some day. P.S. In the Bible there is
something that could have been one of the fine hairs of the rabbit’s
fur. The hair was called the Tower of Babel, and it was destroyed
because the Magician didn’t want the tiny human insects to crawl
up that high out of the white rabbit he had just created.”
Then there was the next question: “Indicate some of the factors
contributing to a person’s philosophy of life.” Upbringing and
environment were important here. People living at the time of Plato
had a different philosophy of life than many people have today
because they lived in a different age and a different environment.
Another factor was the kind of experience people chose to get
themselves.
Common sense was not determined by environment.
Everybody had that. Maybe one could compare environment and
social situation with the conditions that existed deep down in Plato’s
cave. By using their intelligence individuals can start to drag
themselves up from the darkness. But a journey like that requires
personal courage. Socrates is a good example of a person who
managed to free himself from the prevailing views of his time by his
own intelligence. Finally, she wrote: “Nowadays, people of many
lands and cultures are being intermingled more and more.
Christians, Muslims, and Buddhists may live in the same apartment
building. In which case it is more important to accept each other’s 
121
beliefs than to ask why everyone does not believe the same thing.”
Not bad, thought Sophie. She certainly felt she had covered
some ground with what she had learned from her philosophy
teacher. And she could always supplement it with a dash of her own
common sense and what she might have read and heard elsewhere.
She applied herself to the third question: “What is meant by
conscience? Do you think conscience is the same for everyone?”
This was something they had discussed a lot in class. Sophie wrote:
Conscience is people’s ability to respond to right and wrong. My
personal opinion is that everyone is endowed with this ability, so in
other words, conscience is innate. Socrates would have said the
same.
But just what conscience dictates can vary a lot from one
person to the next. One could say that the Sophists had a point here.
They thought that right and wrong is something mainly determined
by the environment the individual grows up in. Socrates, on the
other hand, believed that conscience is the same for everyone.
Perhaps both views were right. Even if everybody doesn’t feel guilty
about showing themselves naked, most people will have a bad
conscience if they are really mean to someone. Still, it must be
remembered that having a conscience is not the same as using it.
Sometimes it looks as if people act quite unscrupulously, but I
believe they also have a kind of conscience somewhere, deep down.
Just as it seems as if some people have no sense at all, but that’s only
because they are not using it. P.S. Common sense and conscience
can both be compared to a muscle. If you don’t use a muscle, it gets
weaker and weaker.”
Now there was only one question left: “What is meant by
priority of values?” This was another thing they had discussed a lot
lately. For example, it could be of value to drive a car and get
quickly from one place to another. But if driving led to deforestation
and polluting the natural environment, you were facing a choice of
values. After careful consideration Sophie felt she had come to the
conclusion that healthy forests and a pure environment were more
valuable than getting to work quickly. She gave several more
examples. Finally she wrote: “Personally, I think Philosophy is a
more important subject than English Grammar. It would therefore 
122
be a sensible priority of values to have Philosophy on the timetable
and cut down a bit on English lessons.”
In the last break the teacher drew Sophie aside.
“I have already read your Religion test,” he said. “It was near
the top of the pile.” “I hope it gave you some food for thought.”
“That was exactly what I wanted to talk to you about. It was in
many ways very mature.
Surprisingly so. And self-reliant. But had you done your
homework, Sophie?” Sophie fidgeted a little.
“Well, you did say it was important to have a personal point of
view.” “Well, yes I did ... but there are limits.”
Sophie looked him straight in the eye. She felt she could permit
herself this after all she had experienced lately.
“I have started studying philosophy,” she said. “It gives one a
good background for personal opinions.”
“But it doesn’t make it easy for me to grade your paper. It will
either be a D or an A.” “Because I was either quite right or quite
wrong? Is that what you’re saying?”
“So let’s say A,” said the teacher. “But next time, do your
homework!”
When Sophie got home from school that afternoon, she flung
her schoolbag on the steps and ran down to the den. A brown
envelope lay on top of the gnarled roots. It was quite dry around the
edges, so it must have been a long time since Hermes had dropped
it.
She took the envelope with her and let herself in the front door.
She fed the animals and then went upstairs to her room. Lying on
her bed, she opened Alberto’s letter and read:
HELLENISM
Here we are again, Sophie! Having read about the natural
philosophers and Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, you are now
familiar with the foundations of European philosophy. So from
now on we will drop the introductory questions which you
earlier received in white envelopes. I imagine you probably 
123
have plenty of other assignments and tests at school. I shall now
tell you about the long period from Aristotle near the end of the
fourth century
B.C. right up to the early Middle Ages around A.D. 400. Notice
that we can now write both B.C. and A.D. because Christianity was
in fact one of the most important, and the most mysterious, factors
of the period.
Aristotle died in the year 322 B.C., at the time when Athens
had lost its dominant role.
This was not least due to the political upheavals resulting from
the conquests of Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.).
Alexander the Great was the King of Macedonia. Aristotle was
also from Macedonia, and for a time he was even the young
Alexander’s tutor. It was Alexander who won the final, decisive
victory over the Persians. And moreover, Sophie, with his many
conquests he linked both Egypt and the Orient as far east as India to
the Greek civilization.
This marked the beginning of a new epoch in the history of mankind.
A civilization sprang up in which Greek culture and the Greek
language played a leading role. This period, which lasted for about
300 years, is known as Hellenism. The term Hellenism refers to both
the period of time and the Greek-dominated culture that prevailed in
the three Hellenistic kingdoms of Macedonia, Syria, and Egypt.
However, from about the year 50 B.C., Rome secured the upper
hand in military and political affairs. The new superpower gradually
conquered all the Hellenistic kingdoms, and from then on Roman
culture and the Latin language were predominant from Spain in the
west to far into Asia. This was the beginning of the Roman period,
which we often refer to as Late Antiquity. But remember one
thing—before the Romans managed to conquer the Hellenistic
world, Rome itself was a province of Greek culture. So Greek
culture and Greek philosophy came to play an important role long
after the political influence of the Greeks was a thing of the past.
Religion, Philosophy and Science
Hellenism was characterized by the fact that the borders between the 
124
various countries and cultures became erased. Previously the
Greeks, the Romans, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Syrians,
and the Persians had worshipped their own gods within what we
generally call a “national religion.” Now the different cultures
merged into one great witch’s caldron of religious, philosophical, -
and scientific ideas.
We could perhaps say that the town square was replaced by the
world arena. The old town square had also buzzed with voices,
bringing now different wares to market, now different thoughts and
ideas. The new aspect was that town squares were being filled with
wares and ideas from all over the world. The voices were buzzing in
many different languages.
We have already mentioned that the Greek view of life was
now much more widespread than it had been in the former Greek
cultural areas. But as time went on, Oriental gods were also
worshipped in all the Mediterranean countries. New religious
formations arose that could draw on the gods and the beliefs of many
of the old nations. This is called syncretism or the fusion of creeds.
Prior to this, people had felt a strong affinity with their own
folk and their own city-state. But as the borders and boundaries
became erased, many people began to experience doubt and
uncertainty about their philosophy of life. Late Antiquity was
generally characterized by religious doubts, cultural dissolution, and
pessimism. It was said that “the world has grown old.”
A common feature of the new religious formations during the
Hellenistic period was that they frequently contained teachings
about how mankind could attain salvation from death.
These teachings were often secret. By accepting the teachings
and performing certain rituals, a believer could hope for the
immortality of the soul and eternal life. A certain insight into the
true nature of the universe could be just as important for the
salvation of the soul as religious rituals.
So much for the new religions, Sophie. But philosophy was
also moving increasingly in the direction of “salvation” and serenity.
Philosophic insight, it was now thought, did not only have its own
reward; it should also free mankind from pessimism and the fear of
death. Thus the boundaries between religion and philosophy were 
125
gradually eliminated.
In general, the philosophy of Hellenism was not startlingly
original. No new Plato or Aristotle appeared on the scene. On the
contrary, the three great Athenian philosophers were a source of
inspiration to a number of philosophic trends which I shall briefly
describe in a moment.
Hellenistic science, too, was influenced by a blend of
knowledge from the various cultures. The town of Alexandria
played a key role here as a meeting place between East and West.
While Athens remained the center of philosophy with still
functioning schools of philosophy after Plato and Aristotle,
Alexandria became the center for science. With its extensive library,
it became the center for mathematics, astronomy, biology, and
medicine.
Hellenistic culture could well be compared to the world of
today. The twentieth century has also been influenced by an
increasingly open civilization. In our own time, too, this opening out
has resulted in tremendous upheavals for religion and philosophy.
And just as in Rome around the beginning of the Christian era one
could come across Greek, Egyptian, and Oriental religions, today,
as we approach the end of the twentieth century, we can find in all
European cities of any size religions from all parts of the world.
We also see nowadays how a conglomeration of old and new
religions, philosophies, and sciences can form the basis of new
offers on the “view-of-life” market. Much of this “new knowledge”
is actually the flotsam of old thought, some of whose roots go back
to Hellenism.
As I have said, Hellenistic philosophy continued to work with
the problems raised by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Common to
them all was their desire to discover how mankind should best live
and die. They were concerned with ethics. In the new civilization,
this became the central philosophical project. The main emphasis
was on finding out what true happiness was and how it could be
achieved. We are going to look at four of these philosophical trends.
126
The Cynics
The story goes that one day Socrates stood gazing at a stall that
sold all kinds of wares.
Finally he said, “What a lot of things I don’t need!”
This statement could be the motto for the Cynic school of
philosophy, founded by Antisthenes in Athens around 400 B.C.
Antisthenes had been a pupil of Socrates, and had become
particularly interested in his frugality.
The Cynics emphasized that true happiness is not found in
external advantages such as material luxury, political power, or
good health. True happiness lies in not being dependent on such
random and fleeting things. And because happiness does not consist
in benefits of this kind, it is within everyone’s reach. Moreover,
having once been attained, it can never be lost.
The best known of the Cynics was Diogenes, a pupil of
Antisthenes, who reputedly lived in a barrel and owned nothing but
a cloak, a stick, and a bread bag. (So it wasn’t easy to steal his
happiness from him!) One day while he was sitting beside his barrel
enjoying the sun, he was visited by Alexander the Great. The
emperor stood before him and asked if there was anything he could
do for him. Was there anything he desired? “Yes,” Diogenes replied.
“Stand to one side. You’re blocking the sun.” Thus Diogenes
showed that he was no less happy and rich than the great man before
him. He had everything he desired.
The Cynics believed that people did not need to be concerned
about their own health.
Even suffering and death should not disturb them. Nor should
they let themselves be tormented by concern for other people’s
woes. Nowadays the terms “cynical” and “cynicism” have come to
mean a sneering disbelief in human sincerity, and they imply
insensitivity to other people’s suffering.
The Stoics
The Cynics were instrumental in the development of the Stoic
school of philosophy, which grew up in Athens around 300 B.C. Its
founder was Zeno, who came originally from Cyprus and joined the 
127
Cynics in Athens after being shipwrecked. He used to gather his
followers under a portico. The name “Stoic” comes from the Greek
word for portico (stoo). Stoicism was later to have great significance
for Roman culture.
Like Heraclitus, the Stoics believed that everyone was a part of
the same common sense—or “logos.” They thought that each person
was like a world in miniature, or “microcosmos,” which is a
reflection of the “macro-cosmos.”
This led to the thought that there exists a universal right-ness,
the so-called natural law. And because this natural law was based on
timeless human and universal reason, it did not alter with time and
place. In this, then, the Stoics sided with Socrates against the
Sophists.
Natural law governed all mankind, even slaves. The Stoics
considered the legal statutes of the various states merely as
incomplete imitations of the “law” embedded in nature itself.
In the same way that the Stoics erased the difference between
the individual and the universe, they also denied any conflict
between “spirit” and “matter.” There is only one nature, they
averred. This kind of idea is called monism (in contrast to Plato’s
clear dualism or two-fold reality).
As true children of their time, the Stoics were distinctly
“cosmopolitan,” in that they were more receptive to contemporary
culture than the “barrel philosophers” (the Cynics). They drew
attention to human fellowship, they were preoccupied with politics,
and many of them, notably the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius
(A.D. 121-180), were active statesmen. They encouraged Greek
culture and philosophy in Rome, one of the most distinguished of
them being the orator, philosopher, and statesman Cicero (106-43
B.C.). It was he who formed the very concept of “humanism”—that
is, a view of life that has the individual as its central focus. Some
years later, the Stoic Seneca (4 B.C.-A.D. 65) said that “to mankind,
mankind is holy.” This has remained a slogan for humanism ever
since.
The Stoics, moreover, emphasized that all natural processes,
such as sickness and death, follow the unbreakable laws of nature.
Man must therefore learn to accept his destiny. Nothing happens 
128
accidentally. Everything happens through necessity, so it is of little
use to complain when fate comes knocking at the door. One must
also accept the happy events of life unperturbed, they thought. In
this we see their kinship with the Cynics, who claimed that all
external events were unimportant. Even today we use the term “stoic
calm” about someone who does not let his feelings take over.
The Epicureans
As we have seen, Socrates was concerned with finding out how
man could live a good life. Both the Cynics and the Stoics
interpreted his philosophy as meaning that man had to free himself
from material luxuries. But Socrates also had a pupil named
Aristippus. He believed that the aim of life was to attain the highest
possible sensory enjoyment. “The highest good is pleasure,” he said,
“the greatest evil is pain.” So he wished to develop a way of life
whose aim was to avoid pain in all forms. (The Cynics and the Stoics
believed in enduring pain of all kinds, which is not the same as
setting out to avoid pain.)
Around the year 300 B.C., Epicurus (341-270) founded a
school of philosophy in Athens.
His followers were called Epicureans. He developed the
pleasure ethic of Aristippus and combined it with the atom theory of
Democritus.
The story goes that the Epicureans lived in a garden. They were
therefore known as the “garden philosophers.” Above the entrance
to this garden there is said to have hung a notice saying, “Stranger,
here you will live well. Here pleasure is the highest good.”
Epicurus emphasized that the pleasurable results of an action
must always be weighed against its possible side effects. If you have
ever binged on chocolate you know what I mean. If you haven’t, try
this exercise: Take all your saved-up pocket money and buy two
hundred crowns’ worth of chocolate. (We’ll assume you like
chocolate.) It is essential to this exercise that you eat it all at one
time. About half an hour later, when all that delicious chocolate is
eaten, you will understand what Epicurus meant by side effects.
Epicurus also believed that a pleasurable result in the short term
must be weighed against the possibility of a greater, more lasting, or 
129
more intense pleasure in the long term. (Maybe you abstain from
eating chocolate for a whole year because you prefer to save up all
your pocket money and buy a new bike or go on an expensive
vacation abroad.) Unlike animals, we are able to plan our lives. We
have the ability to make a “pleasure calculation.” Chocolate is good,
but a new bike or a trip to England is better.
Epicurus emphasized, though, that “pleasure” does not
necessarily mean sensual pleasure—like eating chocolate, for
instance. Values such as friendship and the appreciation of art also
count. Moreover, the enjoyment of life required the old Greek ideals
of self-control, temperance, and serenity. Desire must be curbed,
and serenity will help us to endure pain.
Fear of the gods brought many people to the garden of
Epicurus. In this connection, the atom theory of Democritus was a
useful cure for religious superstitions. In order to live a good life it
is not unimportant to overcome the fear of death. To this end
Epicurus made use of Democritus’s theory of the “soul atoms.” You
may perhaps remember that Democritus believed there was no life
after death because when we die, the “soul atoms” disperse in all
directions.
“Death does not concern us,” Epicurus said quite simply,
“because as long as we exist, death is not here. And when it does
come, we no longer exist.” (When you think about it, no one has
ever been bothered by being dead.)
Epicurus summed up his liberating philosophy with what he
called the four medicinal herbs:
The gods are not to be feared. Death is nothing to worry about.
Good is easy to attain.
The fearful is easy to endure.
From a Greek point of view, there was nothing new in
comparing philosophical projects with those of medical science. The
intention was simply that man should equip himself with a
“philosophic medicine chest” containing the four ingredients I
mentioned.
In contrast to the Stoics, the Epicureans showed little or no
interest in politics and the community. “Live in seclusion!” was the
advice of Epicurus. We could perhaps compare his “garden” with 
130
our present-day communes. There are many people in our own time
who have sought a “safe harbor”—away from society.
After Epicurus, many Epicureans developed an overemphasis
on self-indulgence. Their motto was “Live for the moment!” The
word “epicurean” is used in a negative sense nowadays to describe
someone who lives only for pleasure.
Neoplatonism
As I showed you, Cynicism, Stoicism, and Epicureanism all
had their roots in the teaching of Socrates. They also made use of
certain of the pre-Socratics like Heraclitus and Democritus.
But the most remarkable philosophic trend in the late
Hellenistic period was first and foremost inspired by Plato’s
philosophy. We therefore call it Neoplatonism.
The most important figure in Neoplatonism was Plotinus (c.
205-270), who studied philosophy in Alexandria but later settled in
Rome. It is interesting to note that he came from Alexandria, the city
that had been the central meeting point for Greek philosophy and
Oriental mysticism for several centuries. Plotinus brought with him
to Rome a doctrine of salvation that was to compete seriously with
Christianity when its time came. However, Neoplatonism also
became a strong influence in mainstream Christian theology as well.
Remember Plato’s doctrine of ideas, Sophie, and the way he
distinguished between the world of ideas and the sensory world.
This meant establishing a clear division between the soul and the
body. Man thus became a dual creature: our body consisted of earth
and dust like everything else in the sensory world, but we also had
an immortal soul. This was widely believed by many Greeks long
before Plato. Plotinus was also familiar with similar ideas from Asia.
Plotinus believed that the world is a span between two poles.
At one end is the divine light which he calls the One. Sometimes he
calls it God. At the other end is absolute darkness, which receives
none of the light from the One. But Plotinus’s point is that this
darkness actually has no existence. It is simply the absence of
light—in other words, it is not. All that exists is God, or the One,
but in the same way that a beam of light grows progressively dimmer
and is gradually extinguished, there is somewhere a point that the 
131
divine glow cannot reach.
According to Plotinus, the soul is illuminated by the light from
the One, while matter is the darkness that has no real existence. But
the forms in nature have a faint glow of the One.
Imagine a great burning bonfire in the night from which sparks
fly in all directions. A wide radius of light from the bonfire turns
night into day in the immediate area; but the glow from the fire is
visible even from a distance of several miles. If we went even further
away, we would be able to see a tiny speck of light like a far-off
lantern in the dark, and if we went on moving away, at some point
the light would not reach us. Somewhere the rays of light disappear
into the night, and when it is completely dark we see nothing. There
are neither shapes nor shadows.
Imagine now that reality is a bonfire like this. That which is
burning is God—and the darkness beyond is the cold matter that
man and animals are made of. Closest to God are the eternal ideas
which are the primal forms of all creatures. The human soul, above
all, is a “spark from the fire.” Yet everywhere in nature some of the
divine light is shining. We can see it in all living creatures; even a
rose or a bluebell has its divine glow. Furthest away from the living
God are earth and water and stone.
I am saying that there is something of the divine mystery in
everything that exists. We can see it sparkle in a sunflower or a
poppy. We sense more of this unfathomable mystery in a butterfly
that flutters from a twig—or in a goldfish swimming in a bowl. But
we are closest to God in our own soul. Only there can we become
one with the great mystery of life. In truth, at very rare moments we
can experience that we ourselves are that divine mystery.
Plotinus’s metaphor is rather like Plato’s myth of the cave: the
closer we get to the mouth of the cave, the closer we get to that which
all existence springs from. But in contrast to Plato’s clear two-fold
reality, Plotinus’s doctrine is characterized by an experience of
wholeness.
Everything is one—for everything is God. Even the shadows
deep down in Plato’s cave have a faint glow of the One.
On rare occasions in his life, Plotinus experienced a fusion of
his soul with God. We usually call this a mystical experience. 
132
Plotinus is not alone in having had such experiences. People have
told of them at all times and in all cultures. The details might be
different, but the essential features are the same. Let us take a look
at some of these features.
Mysticism
A mystical experience is an experience of merging with God or
the “cosmic spirit.” Many religions emphasize the gulf between God
and Creation, but the mystic experiences no such gulf. He or she has
experienced being “one with God” or “merging” with Him.
The idea is that what we usually call “I” is not the true “I.” In
short glimpses we can experience an identification with a greater
“I.” Some mystics call it God, others call it the cosmic spirit, Nature,
or the Universe. When the fusion happens, the mystic feels that he
is “losing himself”; he disappears into God or is lost in God in the
same way that a drop of water loses itself when it merges with the
sea. An Indian mystic once expressed it in this way: “When I was,
God was not. When God is, I am no more.” The Christian mystic
Angelus Silesius (1624-1677) put it another way: Every drop
becomes the sea when it flows oceanward, just as at last the soul
ascends and thus becomes the Lord.
Now you might feel that it cannot be particularly pleasant to
“lose oneself.” I know what you mean. But the point is that what
you lose is so very much less than what you gain. You lose yourself
only in the form you have at the moment, but at the same time you
realize that you are something much bigger. You are the universe.
In fact, you are the cosmic spirit itself, Sophie. It is you who are
God. If you have to lose yourself as Sophie Amundsen, you can take
comfort in the knowledge that this “everyday I” is something you
will lose one day anyway.
Your real “I”— which you can only experience if you are able
to lose yourself—is, according to the mystics, like a mysterious fire
that goes on burning to all eternity.
But a mystical experience like this does not always come of
itself. The mystic may have to seek the path of “purification and
enlightenment” to his meeting with God. This path consists of the
simple life and various meditation techniques. Then all at once the 
133
mystic achieves his goal, and can exclaim, “I am God” or “I am
You.”
Mystical trends are found in all the great world religions. And
the descriptions of mystical experiences given by the mystics show
a remarkable similarity across all cultural boundaries. It is in the
mystic’s attempt to provide a religious or philosophic interpretation
of the mystical experience that his cultural background reveals itself.
In Western mysticism—that is, within Judaism, Christianity,
and Islam—the mystic emphasizes that his meeting is with a
personal God. Although God is present both in nature and in the
human soul, he is also far above and beyond the world. In Eastern
mysticism—that is, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Chinese religion—it
is more usual to emphasize that the mystic experiences a total fusion
with God or the “cosmic spirit.”
“I am the cosmic spirit,” the mystic can exclaim, or “I am God.”
For God is not only present in the world; he has nowhere else to be.
In India, especially, there have been strong mystical
movements since long before the time of Plato. Swami
Vivekenanda, an Indian who was instrumental in bringing Hinduism
to the west, once said, “Just as certain world religions say that people
who do not believe in a personal God outside themselves are
atheists, we say that a person who does not believe in himself is an
atheist. Not believing in the splendor of one’s own soul is what we
call atheism.”
A mystical experience can also have ethical significance. A
former president of India, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, said once,
“Love thy neighbor as thyself because you ore your neighbor. It is
an illusion that makes you think that your neighbor is someone other
than yourself.”
People of our own time who do not adhere to a particular
religion also tell of mystical experiences. They have suddenly
experienced something they have called “cosmic consciousness” or
an “oceanic feeling.” They have felt themselves wrenched out of
Time and have experienced the world “from the perspective of
eternity.”
Sophie sat up in bed. She had to feel whether she still had a
body. As she read more and more about Plato and the mystics, she 
134
had begun to feel as though she were floating around in the room,
out of the window and far off above the town. From there she had
looked down on all the people in the square, and had floated on and
on over the globe that was her home, over the North Sea and Europe,
down over the Sahara and across the African savanna.
The whole world had become almost like a living person, and
it felt as if that person were Sophie herself. The world is me, she
thought. The great big universe that she had often felt to be
unfathomable and terrifying—was her own “I.” Now, too, the
universe was enormous and majestic, but now it was herself who
was so big.
The extraordinary feeling was fleeting, but Sophie was sure she
would never forget it. It felt as if something inside her had burst
through her forehead and become merged with everything else, the
way a drop of color can tint a whole jug of water.
When it was all over, it was like waking up with a headache
after a wonderful dream. Sophie registered with a touch of
disillusionment that she had a body which was trying to sit up in
bed. Lying on her stomach reading the pages from Alberto Knox
had given her a backache. But she had experienced something
unforgettable.
Eventually she pulled herself together and stood up. The first
thing she did was to punch holes in the pages and file them in her
ring binder together with the other lessons. Then she .went into the
garden.
The birds were singing as if the world had just been born. The
pale green of the birches behind the old rabbit hutches was so intense
that it seemed as though the Creator had not yet finished blending
the color.
Could she really believe that everything was one divine “I”?
Could she believe that she carried within her a soul that was a “spark
from the fire”? If it was true, then she was truly a divine creature.
135
The Postcards
…I’m imposing a severe censorship on myself…
Several days went by without any word from the philosophy teacher.
Tomorrow was Thursday, May 17— Norway’s national day. School
would be closed on the 18th as well. As they walked home after
school Joanna suddenly exclaimed, “Let’s go camping!”
Sophie’s immediate reaction was that she couldn’t be away
from the house for long. But then she said, “Sure, why not?”
A couple of hours later Joanna arrived at Sophie’s door with a
large backpack. Sophie had packed hers as well, and she also had
the tent. They both had bedrolls and sweaters, groundsheets and
flashlights, large-size thermos bottles and plenty of their favorite
food.
When Sophie’s mother got home around five o’clock, she gave
them a sermon about what they must and must not do. She also
insisted on knowing where they were going to set up camp.
They told her they intended to make for Grouse Top. They
might be lucky enough to hear the mating call of the grouse next
morning.
Sophie had an ulterior motive for choosing that particular spot.
She thought that Grouse Top must be pretty close to the major’s
cabin. Something was urging her to return to it, but she didn’t dare
go alone.
The two girls walked down the path that led from the little cul-
136
de-sac just beyond Sophie’s garden gate. They chatted about this
and that, and Sophie enjoyed taking a little time off from everything
having to do with philosophy.
By eight o’clock they had pitched their tent in a clearing by
Grouse Top. They had prepared themselves for the night and their
bedrolls were unfolded. When they had eaten their sandwiches,
Sophie asked, “Have you ever heard of the major’s cabin?”
“The major’s cabin?”
“There’s a hut in the woods somewhere near here ... by a little
lake. A strange man lived there once, a major, that’s why it’s called
the major’s cabin.”
“Does anyone live there now?” “Do you want to go and see?”
“Where is it?”
Sophie pointed in among the trees.
Joanna was not particularly eager, but in the end they set out.
The sun was low in the sky.
They walked in between the tall pine trees at first, but soon they
were pushing their way through bush and thicket. Eventually they
made their way down to a path. Could it be the path Sophie had
followed that Sunday morning?
It must have been—almost at once she could point to
something shining between the trees to the right of the path.
“It’s in there,” she said.
They were soon standing at the edge of the small lake. Sophie
gazed at the cabin across the water. All the windows were now
shuttered up. The red building was the most deserted place she had
seen for ages.
Joanna turned toward her. “Do we have to walk on the water?”
“Of course not. We’ll row.”
Sophie pointed down into the reeds. There lay the rowboat, just
as before. “Have you been here before?”
Sophie shook her head. Trying to explain her previous visit
would be far too complicated. And then she would have to tell her
friend about Alberto Knox and the philosophy course as well.
They laughed and joked as they rowed across the water. When
they reached the opposite bank, Sophie made sure they drew the boat
well up on land.
137
They went to the front door. As there was obviously nobody in
the cabin, Joanna tried the door handle.
“Locked... you didn’t expect it to be open, did you?” “Maybe
we can find a key,” said Sophie.
She began to search in the crevices of the stonework
foundation.
“Oh, let’s go back to the tent instead,” said Joanna after a few
minutes. But just then Sophie exclaimed, “Here it is! I found it!”
She held up the key triumphantly. She put it in the lock and the
door swung open.
The two friends sneaked inside as if they were up to something
criminal. It was cold and dark in the cabin.
“We can’t see a thing!” said Joanna.
But Sophie had thought of that. She took a box of matches out
of her pocket and struck one. They only had time to see that the
cabin was deserted before the match went out. Sophie struck
another, and this time she noticed a stump of candle in a wroughtiron candlestick on top of the stove. She lit it with the third match
and the little room became light enough for them to look around.
“Isn’t it odd that such a small candle can light up so much
darkness?” said Sophie. Her friend nodded.
“But somewhere the light disappears into the dark,” Sophie
went on. “Actually, darkness has no existence of its own. It’s only a
lack of light.”
Joanna shivered. “That’s creepy! Come on, let’s go...”
“Not before we’ve looked in the mirror.”
Sophie pointed to the brass mirror hanging above the chest of
drawers, just as before. “That’s really pretty!” said Joanna.
“But it’s a magic mirror.”
“Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?”
“I’m not kidding, Joanna. I am sure you can look in it and see
something on the other side.”
“Are you sure you’ve never been here before? And why is it so
amusing to scare me all the time?” Sophie could not answer that one.
“Sorry.”
Now it was Joanna who suddenly discovered something lying
on the floor in the corner. It was a small box. Joanna picked it up.
138
“Postcards,” she said. Sophie gasped.
“Don’t touch them! Do you hear—don’t you dare touch them!”
Joanna jumped. She threw the box down as if she had burnt
herself. The postcards were strewn all over the floor. The next
second she began to laugh.
“They’re only postcards!”
Joanna sat down on the floor and started to pick them up. After
a while Sophie sat down beside her.
“Lebanon ... Lebanon ... Lebanon ... They are all postmarked
in Lebanon,” Joanna discovered. “I know,” said Sophie.
Joanna sat bolt upright and looked Sophie in the eye. “So you
have been here before!”
“Yes, I guess I have.”
It suddenly struck her that it would have been a whole lot easier
if she had just admitted she had been here before. It couldn’t do any
harm if she let her friend in on the mysterious things she had
experienced during the last few days.
“I didn’t want to tell you before we were here.” Joanna began
to read the cards.
“They are all addressed to someone called Hilde Moller Knag.”
Sophie had not touched the cards yet.
“What address?”
Joanna read: “Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Alberto Knox, Lillesand,
Norway.”
Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. She was afraid they would say
c/o Sophie Amundsen. She began to inspect them more closely.
“April 28 ... May 4 ... May 6 ... May 9 ... They were stamped a
few days ago.”
“But there’s something else. All the postmarks are Norwegian!
Look at that... UN Battalion ... the stamps are Norwegian too!”
“I think that’s the way they do it. They have to be sort of
neutral, so they have their own Norwegian post office down there.”
“But how do they get the mail home?” “The air force,
probably.”
Sophie put the candlestick on the floor, and the two friends
began to read the cards. Joanna arranged them in chronological
order and read the first card:
139
Dear Hilde,
I can’t wait to come home to Lillesand. I expect to land at
Kjevik airport early evening on Midsummer Eve. I would much
rather have arrived in time for your 15th birthday but I’m under military command of course. To make up for it, I promise to devote all
my loving care to the huge present you are getting for your birthday.
With love from someone who is always thinking about his
daughter’s future.
P.S. I’m sending a copy of this card to our mutual friend. I
know you understand, Hilde. At the moment I’m being very
secretive, but you will understand.
Sophie picked up the next card:
Dear Hilde,
Down here we take one day at a time. If there is one thing I’m
going to remember from these months in Lebanon, it’s all this
waiting. But I’m doing what I can so you have as great a 15th
birthday as possible. I can’t say any more at the moment. I’m
imposing a severe censorship on myself.
Love, Dad.
The two friends sat breathless with excitement. Neither of them
spoke, they just read what was written on the cards:
My dear child, What I would like best would be to send you my
secret thoughts with a white dove.
But they are all out of white doves in Lebanon. If there is
anything this war-torn country needs, it is white doves. I pray the
UN will truly manage to make peace in the world some day.
P.S. Maybe your birthday present can be shared with other
people. Let’s talk about that when I get home. But you still have no
idea what I’m talking about, right? Love from someone who has
plenty of time to think for the both of us.
When they had read six cards, there was only one left. It read:
140
Dear Hilde,
I am now so bursting with all these secrets for your birthday
that I have to stop myself several times a day from calling home and
blowing the whole thing. It is something that simply grows and
grows. And as you know, when a thing gets bigger and bigger it’s
more difficult to keep it to yourself.
Love from Dad.
P.S. Some day you will meet a girl called Sophie. To give you
both a chance to get to know more about each other before you meet,
I have begun sending her copies of all the cards I send to you. I
expect she will soon begin to catch on, Hilde. As yet she knows no
more than you. She has a girlfriend called Joanna. Maybe she can
be of help?
After reading the last card, Joanna and Sophie sat quite still
staring wildly at each other. Joanna was holding Sophie’s wrist in a
tight grip.
“I’m scared,” she said. “So am I.”
“When was the last card stamped?” Sophie looked again at the
card. “May 16,” she said. “That’s today.”
“It can’t be!” cried Joanna, almost angrily.
They examined the postmark carefully, but there was no
mistaking it... 05-16-90.
“It’s impossible,” insisted Joanna. “And I can’t imagine who
could have written it. It must be someone who knows us. But how
could they know we would come here on this particular day?”
Joanna was by far the more scared of the two. The business
with Hilde and her father was nothing new to Sophie.
“I think it has something to do with the brass mirror.” Joanna
jumped again.
“You don’t actually think the cards come fluttering out of the
mirror the minute they are stamped in Lebanon?”
“Do you have a better explanation?” “No.”
141
Sophie got to her feet and held the candle up in front of the two
portraits on the wall. Joanna came over and peered at the pictures.
“Berkeley and Bjerkely. What does that mean?”
“I have no idea.”
The candle was almost burnt down. “Let’s go,” said Joanna.
“Come on!” “We must just take the mirror with us.”
Sophie reached up and unhooked the large brass mirror from
the wall above the chest of drawers.
Joanna tried to stop her but Sophie would not be deterred.
When they got outside it was as dark as a May night can get.
There was enough light in the sky for the clear outlines of bushes
and trees to be visible. The small lake lay like a reflection of the sky
above it. The two girls rowed pensively across to the other side.
Neither of them spoke much on the way back to the tent, but
each knew that the other was thinking intensely about what they had
seen. Now and then a frightened bird would start up, and a couple
of times they heard the hooting of an owl.
As soon as they reached the tent, they crawled into their
bedrolls. Joanna refused to have the mirror inside the tent. Before
they fell asleep, they agreed that it was scary enough, knowing it
was just outside the tent flap. Sophie had also taken the postcards
and put them in one of the pockets of her backpack.
They woke early next morning. Sophie was up first. She put her
boots on and went outside the tent. There lay the large mirror in the
grass, covered with dew.
Sophie wiped the dew off with her sweater and gazed down at
her own reflection. It was as if she was looking down and up at
herself at the same time. Luckily she found no early morning
postcard from Lebanon.
Above the broad clearing behind the tent a ragged morning mist
was drifting slowly into little wads of cotton. Small birds were
chirping energetically but Sophie could neither see nor hear any
grouse.
The girls put on extra sweaters and ate their breakfast outside
the tent. Their conversation soon turned to the major’s cabin and the
mysterious cards.
After breakfast they folded up the tent and set off for home. 
142
Sophie carried the large mirror under her arm. From time to time she
had to rest—Joanna refused to touch it.
As they approached the outskirts of the town they heard a few
sporadic shots. Sophie recalled what Hilde’s father had written
about war-torn Lebanon, and she realized how lucky she was to have
been born in a peaceful country. The “shots” they heard came from
innocent fireworks celebrating the national holiday.
Sophie invited Joanna in for a cup of hot chocolate. Her mother
was very curious to know where they had found the mirror. Sophie
told her they had found it outside the major’s cabin, and her mother
repeated the story about nobody having lived there for many years.
When Joanna had gone, Sophie put on a red dress. The rest of
the Norwegian national day passed quite normally. In the evening,
the TV news had a feature on how the Norwegian UN battalion had
celebrated the day in Lebanon. Sophie’s eyes were glued to the
screen. One of the men she was seeing could be Hilde’s father.
The last thing Sophie did on May 17 was to hang the large
mirror on the wall in her room. The following morning there was a
new brown envelope in the den. She tore it open at once and began
to read.
143
Two Cultures
... the only way to avoid floating in a vacuum …
It won’t be long now before we meet, my dear Sophie. I thought you
would return to the major’s cabin—that’s why I left all the cards
from Hilde’s father there. That was the only way they could be
delivered to her. Don’t worry about how she will get them. A lot can
happen before June 15.
We have seen how the Hellenistic philosophers recycled the
ideas of earlier philosophers. Some even attempted to turn their
predecessors into religious prophets. Plotinus came close to
acclaiming Plato as the savior of humanity.
But as we know, another savior was born during the period we
have just been discussing—and that happened outside the GrecoRoman area. I refer to Jesus of Nazareth. In this chapter we will see
how Christianity gradually began to permeate the Greco-Roman
world—more or less the same way that Hilde’s world has gradually
begun to permeate ours.
Jesus was a jew, and the Jews belong to Semitic culture. The
Greeks and the Romans belong to Indo-European culture. European
civilization has its roots in both cultures. But before we take a closer
look at the way Christianity influenced Greco-Roman culture, we
must examine these roots.
THE INDO-EUROPEANS
By Indo-European we mean all the nations and cultures that use
Indo-European languages. This covers all European nations except 
144
those whose inhabitants speak one of the Finno-Ugrian languages
(Lapp, Finnish, Estonian, and Hungarian) or Basque. In addition,
most Indian and Iranian languages belong to the Indo-European
family of languages.
About 4,000 years ago, the primitive Indo-Europeans lived in
areas bordering on the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. From there,
waves of these Indo-European tribes began to wander southeast into
Iran and India, southwest to Greece, Italy, and Spain, westward
through Central Europe to France and Britain, northwestward to
Scandinavia and northward to Eastern Europe and Russia. Wherever
they went, the Indo-Europeans assimilated with the local culture,
although Indo-European languages and Indo-European religion
came to play a dominant role.
The ancient Indian Veda scriptures and Greek philosophy, and
for that matter Snorri Sturluson’s mythology are all written in
related languages. But it is not only the languages that are related.
Related languages often lead to related ideas. This is why we usually
speak of an Indo-European “culture.”
The culture of the Indo-Europeans was influenced most of all
by their belief in many gods. This is called polytheism. The names
of these gods as well as much of the religious terminology recur
throughout the whole Indo-European area. I’ll give you a few
examples:
The ancient Indians worshipped the celestial god Dyaus, which
in Sanskrit means the sky, day, heaven/ Heaven. In Greek this god
is called Zeus, in Latin, Jupiter (actually iov-pater, or “Father
Heaven”), and in Old Norse, Tyr. So the names Dyaus, Zeus, lov,
and Tyr are dialectal variants of the same word.
You probably learned that the old Vikings believed in gods
which they called Aser. This is another word we find recurring all
over the Indo-European area. In Sanskrit, the ancient classical
language of India, the gods are called asura and in Persian Ahura.
Another word for “god” is deva in Sanskrit, claeva in Persian, deus
in Latin and tivurr in Old Norse.
In Viking times, people also believed in a special group of
fertility gods (such as Niord, Freyr, and Freyja). These gods were
referred to by a special collective name, vaner, a word that is related 
145
to the Latin name for the goddess of fertility, Venus. Sanskrit has
the related word vani, which means “desire.”
There is also a clear affinity to be observed in some of the IndoEuropean myths. In Snorri’s stories of the Old Norse gods, some of
the myths are similar to the myths of India that were handed down
from two to three thousand years earlier. Although Snorri’s myths
reflect the Nordic environment and the Indian myths reflect the
Indian, many of them retain traces of a common origin. We can see
these traces most clearly in myths about immortal potions and the
struggles of the gods against the monsters of chaos.
We can also see clear similarities in modes of thought across
the Indo-European cultures. A typical likeness is the way the world
is seen as being the subject of a drama in which the forces of Good
and Evil confront each other in a relentless struggle. Indo-Europeans
have therefore often tried to “predict” how the battles between Good
and Evil will turn out.
One could say with some truth that it was no accident that
Greek philosophy originated in the Indo-European sphere of culture.
Indian, Greek, and Norse mythology all have obvious leanings
toward a philosophic, or “speculative,” view of the world.
The Indo-Europeans sought “insight” into the history of the
world. We can even trace a particular word for “insight” or
“knowledge” from one culture to another all over the IndoEuropean world. In Sanskrit it is vidya. The word is identical to the
Greek word idea, which was so important in Plato’s philosophy.
From Latin, we have the word video, but on Roman ground the word
simply means to see. For us, “I see” can mean “I understand,” and
in the cartoons, a light bulb can flash on above Woody
Woodpecker’s head when he gets a bright idea. (Not until our own
day did “seeing” become synonymous with staring at the TV
screen.) In English we know the words wise and wisdom—in
German, wissen (to know). Norwegian has the word viten, which
has the same root as the Indian word vidya, the Greek idea, and the
Latin video.
All in all, we can establish that sight was the most important of
the senses for Indo- Europeans. The literature of Indians, Greeks,
Persians, and Teutons alike was characterized by great cosmic 
146
visions. (There is that word again: “vision” comes from the Latin
verb “video.”} It was also characteristic for Indo-European culture
to make pictures and sculptures of the gods and of mythical events.
Lastly, the Indo-Europeans had a cyc//c view of history. This
is the belief that history goes in circles, just like the seasons of the
year. There is thus no beginning and no end to history, but there are
different civilizations that rise and fall in an eternal interplay
between birth and death.
Both of the two great Oriental religions, Hinduism and
Buddhism, are Indo-European in origin. So is Greek philosophy, and
we can see a number of clear parallels between Hinduism and
Buddhism on the one hand and Greek philosophy on the other. Even
today, Hinduism and Buddhism are strongly imbued with
philosophical reflection.
Not infrequently we find in Hinduism and Buddhism an
emphasis on the fact that the deity is present in all things (pantheism)
and that man can become one with God through religious insight.
(Remember Plotinus, Sophie?) To achieve this requires the practice
of deep self- communion or meditation. Therefore in the Orient,
passivity and seclusion can be religious ideals. In ancient Greece,
too, there were many people who believed in an ascetic, or
religiously secluded, way of life for the salvation of the soul. Many
aspects of medieval monastic life can be traced back to beliefs dating
from the Greco-Roman civilization.
Similarly, the transmigration of the soul, or the cycle of rebirth,
is a fundamental belief in many Indo-European cultures. For more
than 2,500 years, the ultimate purpose of life for every Indian has
been the release from the cycle of rebirth. Plato also believed in the
transmigration of the soul.
The Semites
Let us now turn to the Semites, Sophie. They belong to a
completely different culture with a completely different language.
The Semites originated in the Arabian Peninsula, but they also
migrated to different parts of the world. The Jews lived far from
their home for more than 2,000 years. Semitic history and religion
reached furthest away from its roots by way of Christendom, 
147
although Semitic culture also became widely spread via Islam.
All three Western religions—Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam—share a Semitic background. The Muslims’ holy scripture,
the Koran, and the Old Testament were both written in the Semitic
family of languages. One of the Old Testament words for “god” has
the same semantic root as the Muslim Allah. (The word “allah”
means, quite simply, “god.”)
When we get to Christianity the picture becomes more
complicated. Christianity also has a Semitic background, but the
New Testament was written in Greek, and when the Christian
theology or creed was formulated, it was influenced by Greek and
Latin, and thus also by Hellenistic philosophy.
The Indo-Europeans believed in many different gods. It was
just as characteristic for the Semites that from earliest times they
were united in their belief in one God. This is called monotheism.
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all share the same fundamental idea
that there is only one God.
The Semites also had in common a linear view of history. In
other words, history was seen as an ongoing line. In the beginning
God created the world and that was the beginning of history. But
one day history will end and that will be Judgment Day, when God
judges the living and the dead.
The role played by history is an important feature of these three
Western religions. The belief is that God intervenes in the course of
history—even that history exists in order that God may manifest his
will in the world, just as he once led Abraham to the “Promised
Land,” he leads mankind’s steps through history to the Day of
Judgment. When that day comes, all evil in the world will be
destroyed.
With their strong emphasis on God’s activity in the course of
history, the Semites were preoccupied with the writing of history for
many thousands of years. And these historical roots constitute the
very core of their holy scriptures.
Even today the city of Jerusalem is a significant religious center
for Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike. This indicates something of
the common background of these three religions.
The city comprises prominent (Jewish) synagogues, (Christian) 
148
churches, and (Islamic) mosques. It is therefore deeply tragic that
Jerusalem should have become a bone of contention—with people
killing each other by the thousand because they cannot agree on who
is to have ascendancy over this “Eternal City.” May the UN one day
succeed in making Jerusalem a holy shrine for all three religions!
(We shall not go any further into this more practical part of our
philosophy course for the moment. We will leave it entirely to
Hilde’s father. You must have gathered by now that he is a UN
observer in Lebanon. To be more precise, I can reveal that he is
serving as a major. If you are beginning to see some connection,
that’s quite as it should be. On the other hand, let’s not anticipate
events!)
We said that the most important of the senses for IndoEuropeans was sight. How important hearing was to the Semitic
cultures is just as interesting. It is no accident that the Jewish creed
begins with the words: “Hear, O Israel!” In the Old Testament we
read how the people “heard” the word of the Lord, and the Jewish
prophets usually began their sermons with the words: “Thus spake
Jehovah (God).”
“Hearing” the word of God is also emphasized in Christianity.
The religious ceremonies of Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are all
characterized by reading aloud or “reciting.”
I also mentioned that the Indo-Europeans always made
pictorial representations or sculptures of their gods. It was just as
characteristic for the Semites that they never did. They were not
supposed to create pictures or sculptures of God or the “deity.” The
Old Testament commands that the people shall not make any image
of God. This is still law today both for Judaism and Islam. Within
Islam there is moreover a general aversion to both photography and
art, because people should not compete with God in “creating”
anything.
But the Christian churches are full of pictures of Jesus and
God, you are probably thinking. True enough, Sophie, but this
is just one example of how Christendom was influenced by the
Greco-Roman world. (In the Greek Orthodox Church—that is,
in Greece and in Russia—“graven images,” or sculptures and 
149
crucifixes, from Bible stories are still forbidden.)
In contrast to the great religions of the Orient, the three Western
religions emphasize that there is a distance between God and his
creation. The purpose is not to be released from the cycle of rebirth,
but to be redeemed from sin and blame. Moreover, religious life is
characterized more by prayer, sermons, and the study of the
scriptures than by self-communion and meditation.
Israel
I have no intention of competing with your religion teacher,
Sophie, but let us just make a quick summary of Christianity’s
Jewish background.
It all began when God created the world. You can read how that
happened on the very first page of the Bible. Then mankind began
to rebel against God. Their punishment was not only that Adam and
Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden—Death also came into
the world.
Man’s disobedience to God is a theme that runs right through
the Bible. If we go further on in the Book of Genesis we read about
the Flood and Noah’s Ark. Then we read that God made a covenant
with Abraham and his seed. This covenant—or pact—was that
Abraham and all his seed would keep the Lord’s commandments. In
exchange God promised to protect all the children of Abraham. This
covenant was renewed when Moses was given the Ten
Commandments on Mount Sinai around the year 1200 B.C. At that
time the Israelites had long been held as slaves in Egypt, but with
God’s help they were led back to the land of Israel.
About 1,000 years before Christ—and therefore long
before there was anything called Greek philosophy—we hear
of three great kings of Israel. The first was Saul, then came
David, and after him came Solomon. Now all the Israelites
were united in one kingdom, and under King David,
especially, they experienced a period of political, military, and
cultural glory. When kings were chosen, they were anointed
by the people. They thus received the title Messiah, which means 
150
“the anointed one.” In a religious sense kings were looked upon as
a go-between between God and his people. The king could therefore
also be called the “Son of God” and the country could be called the
“Kingdom of God.”
But before long Israel began to lose its power and the kingdom
was divided into a Northern kingdom (Israel) and a Southern
kingdom (Judea). In 722 B.C. the Northern kingdom was conquered
by the Assyrians and it lost all political and religious significance.
The Southern kingdom fared no better, being conquered by the
Babylonians in 586 B.C. Its temple was destroyed and most of its
people were carried off to slavery in Babylon. This “Babylonian
captivity” lasted until 539 B.C. when the people were permitted to
return to Jerusalem, and the great temple was restored. But for the
rest of the period before the birth of Christ the Jews continued to
live under foreign domination.
The question Jews constantly asked themselves was why the
Kingdom of David was destroyed and why catastrophe after
catastrophe rained down on them, for God had promised to hold
Israel in his hand. But the people had also promised to keep God’s
commandments. It gradually became widely accepted that God was
punishing Israel for her disobedience.
From around 750 B.C. various prophets began to come forward
preaching God’s wrath over Israel for not keeping his
commandments. One day God would hold a Day of Judgment over
Israel, they said. We call prophecies like these Doomsday
prophecies.
In the course of time there came other prophets who preached
that God would redeem a chosen few of his people and send them a
“Prince of Peace” or a king of the House of David. He would restore
the old Kingdom of David and the people would have a future of
prosperity.
“The people that walked in darkness will see a great light,” said
the prophet Isaiah, and “they that dwell in the land of the shadow of
death, upon them hath the light shined.” We call prophecies like
these prophecies of redemption.
To sum up: The children of Israel lived happily under King
David. But later on when their situation deteriorated, their prophets 
151
began to proclaim that there would one day come a new king of the
House of David. This “Messiah,” or “Son of God,” would “redeem”
the people, restore Israel to greatness, and found a “Kingdom of
God.”
Jesus
I assume you are still with me, Sophie? The key words are
“Messiah,” “Son of God,” and “Kingdom of God.” At first it was all
taken politically. In the time of Jesus, there were a lot of people who
imagined that there would come a new “Messiah” in the sense of a
political, military, and religious leader of the caliber of King David.
This “savior” was thus looked upon as a national deliverer who
would put an end to the suffering of the Jews under Roman
domination.
Well and good. But there were also many people who were
more farsighted. For the past two hundred years there had been
prophets who believed that the promised “Messiah” would be the
savior of the whole world. He would not simply free the Israelites
from a foreign yoke, he would save all mankind from sin and
blame—and not least, from death. The longing for “salvation” in the
sense of redemption was widespread all over the Hellenistic world.
So along comes Jesus of Nazareth. He was not the only man
ever to have come forward as the promised “Messiah.” Jesus also
uses the words “Son of God,” the “Kingdom of God,” and
“redemption.” In doing this he maintains the link with the old
prophets. He rides into Jerusalem and allows himself to be
acclaimed by the crowds as the savior of the people, thus playing
directly on the way the old kings were installed in a characteristic
“throne accession ritual.” He also allows himself to be anointed by
the people. “The time is fulfilled,” he says, and “the Kingdom of
God is at hand.”
But here is a very important point: Jesus distinguished himself
from the other “messiahs” by stating clearly that he was not a
military or political rebel. His mission was much greater. He
preached salvation and God’s forgiveness for everyone. To the
people he met on his way he said “Your sins are forgiven you for his
name’s sake.”
152
Handing out the “remission of sins” in this way was totally
unheard of. And what was even worse, he addressed God as “Father”
(Abba). This was absolutely unprecedented in the Jewish
community at that time. It was therefore not long before there arose
a wave of protest against him among the scribes.
So here was the situation: a great many people at the time of
Jesus were waiting for a Messiah who would reestablish the
Kingdom of God with a great flourish of trumpets (in other words,
with fire and sword). The expression “Kingdom of God” was indeed
a recurring theme in the preachings of Jesus—but in a much broader
sense. Jesus said that the “Kingdom of God” is loving thy neighbor,
compassion for the weak and the poor, and forgiveness of those who
have erred.
This was a dramatic shift in the meaning of an age-old
expression with warlike overtones.
People were expecting a military leader who would soon
proclaim the establishment of the Kingdom of God, and along
comes Jesus in kirtle and sandals telling them that the Kingdom of
God— or the “new covenant”—is that you must “love thy neighbor
as thyself.” But that was not all, Sophie, he also said that we must
love our enemies. When they strike us, we must not retaliate; we
must even turn the other cheek. And we must forgive—not seven
times but seventy times seven.
Jesus himself demonstrated that he was not above talking to
harlots, corrupt usurers, and the politically subversive. But he went
even further: he said that a good-for-nothing who has squandered all
his father’s inheritance— or a humble publican who has pocketed
official funds— is righteous before God when he repents and prays
for forgiveness, so great is God’s mercy.
But hang on—he went a step further: Jesus said that such
sinners were more righteous in the eyes of God and more deserving
of God’s forgiveness than the spotless Pharisees who went around
flaunting their virtue.
Jesus pointed out that nobody can earn God’s mercy. We
cannot redeem ourselves (as many of the Greeks believed). The
severe ethical demands made by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount
were not only to teach what the will of God meant, but also to show 
153
that no man is righteous in the eyes of God. God’s mercy is
boundless, but we have to turn to God and pray for his forgiveness.
I shall leave a more thorough study of Jesus and his teachings
to your religion teacher. He will have quite a task. I hope he will
succeed in showing what an exceptional man Jesus was. In an
ingenious way he used the language of his time to give the old war
cries a totally new and broader content. It’s not surprising that he
ended on the Cross. His radical tidings of redemption were at odds
with so many interests and power factors that he had to be removed.
When we talked about Socrates, we saw how dangerous it
could be to appeal to people’s reason. With Jesus we see how
dangerous it can be to demand unconditional brotherly love and
unconditional forgiveness. Even in the world of today we can see
how mighty powers can come apart at the seams when confronted
with simple demands for peace, love, food for the poor, and amnesty
for the enemies of the state.
You may recall how incensed Plato was that the most righteous
man in Athens had to forfeit his life. According to Christian
teachings, Jesus was the only righteous person who ever lived.
Nevertheless he was condemned to death. Christians say he died for
the sake of humanity. This is what Christians usually call the
“Passion” of Christ Jesus was the “suffering servant” who bore the
sins of humanity in order that we could be “atoned” and saved from
God’s wrath.
Paul
A few days after Jesus had been crucified and buried, rumors
spread that he had risen from the grave. He thereby proved that he
was no ordinary man. He truly was the “Son of God.”
We could say that the Christian Church was founded on Easter
Morning with the rumors of the resurrection of Jesus. This is already
established by Paul: “And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain and your faith is also vain.”
Now all mankind could hope for the resurrection of the body,
for it was to save us that Jesus was crucified. But, dear Sophie,
remember that from a Jewish point of view there was no question of
the “immortality of the soul” or any form of “transmigration”; that 
154
was a Greek— and therefore an Indo-European—thought.
According to Christianity there is nothing in man— no “soul,” for
example— that is in itself immortal. Although the Christian Church
believes in the “resurrection of the body and eternal life,” it is by
God’s miracle that we are saved from death and “damnation.” It is
neither through our own merit nor through any natural—or innate—
ability.
So the early Christians began to preach the “glad tidings” of
salvation through faith in Jesus Christ. Through his mediation, the
“Kingdom of God” was about to become a reality. Now the entire
world could be won for Christ. (The word “christ” is a Greek
translation of the Hebrew word “messiah,” the anointed one.)
A few years after the death of Jesus, the Pharisee Paul
converted to Christianity.
Through his many missionary journeys across the whole of the
Greco-Roman world he made Christianity a worldwide religion. We
hear of this in the Acts of the Apostles. Paul’s preaching and
guidance for the Christians is known to us from the many epistles
written by him to the early Christian congregations.
He then turns up in Athens. He wanders straight into the city
square of the philosophic capital. And it is said that “his spirit was
stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.” He
visited the Jewish synagogue in Athens and conversed with
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers. They took him up to the
Areopagos hill and asked him: “May we know what this new
doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? For thou bringest certain
strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these
things mean.”
Can you imagine it, Sophie? A Jew suddenly appears in the
Athenian marketplace and starts talking about a savior who was
hung on a cross and later rose from the grave. Even from this visit
of Paul in Athens we sense a coming collision between Greek
philosophy and the doctrine of Christian redemption. But Paul
clearly succeeds in getting the Athenians to listen to him. From the
Areopagos—and beneath the proud temples of the Acropolis— he
makes the following speech:
“Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too 
155
superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found
an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom
therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he
is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with
hands; neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed
any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. And
hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed,
and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far
from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our
being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also
his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, graven by art and man’s device. And the times of this
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere
to repent:
Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof
he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from
the dead.”
Paul in Athens, Sophie! Christianity has begun to penetrate the
Greco-Roman world as something else, something completely
different from Epicurean, Stoic, or Neoplatonic philosophy. But
Paul nevertheless finds some common ground in this culture. He
emphasizes that the search for God is natural to all men. This was
not new to the Greeks. But what was new in Paul’s preaching is that
God has also revealed himself to mankind and has in truth reached
out to them. So he is no longer a “philosophic God” that people can
approach with their understanding. Neither is he “an image of gold
or silver or stone”—there were plenty of those both on the Acropolis
and down in the marketplace! He is a God that “dwelleth not in
temples made with hands.” He is a personal God who intervenes in
the course of history and dies on the Cross for the sake of mankind.
When Paul had made his speech on the Areopagos, we read in
the Acts of the Apostles, some mocked him for what he said about 
156
the resurrection from the dead. But others said: “We will hear thee
again of this matter.” There were also some who followed Paul and
began to believe in Christianity. One of them, it is worth noting, was
a woman named Damaris. Women were amongst the most fervent
converts to Christianity.
So Paul continued his missionary activities. A few decades
after the death of Jesus, Christian congregations were already
established in all the important Greek and Roman cities—in Athens,
in Rome, in Alexandria, in Ephesos, and in Corinth. In the space of
three to four hundred years, the entire Hellenistic world had become
Christian.
The Creed
It was not only as a missionary that Paul came to have a
fundamental significance for Christianity. He also had great
influence within the Christian congregations. There was a
widespread need for spiritual guidance.
One important question in the early years after Jesus was
whether non-Jews could become Christians without first becoming
Jews. Should a Greek, for instance, observe the dietary laws? Paul
believed it to be unnecessary. Christianity was more than a Jewish
sect. It addressed itself to everybody in a universal message of
salvation. The “Old Covenant” between God and Israel had been
replaced by the “New Covenant” which Jesus had estab- lished
between God and mankind.
However, Christianity was not the only religion at that time.
We have seen how Hellenism was influenced by a fusion of
religions. It was thus vitally necessary for the church to step forward
with a concise summary of the Christian doctrine, both in order to
distance itself from other religions and to prevent schisms within the
Christian Church. Therefore the first Creed was established,
summing up the central Christian “dogmas” or tenets.
One such central tenet was that Jesus was both God and
man. He was not the “Son of God” on the strength of his
actions alone. He was God himself. But he was also a “true 
157
man” who had shared the misfortunes of mankind and actually
suffered on the Cross.
This may sound like a contradiction. But the message of the
church was precisely that God became man. Jesus was not a
“demigod” (which was half man, half god). Belief in such
“demigods” was quite widespread in Greek and Hellenistic
religions. The church taught that Jesus was “perfect God, perfect
man.”
Postscript
Let me try to say a few words about how all this hangs together,
my dear Sophie. As Christianity makes its entry into the GrecoRoman world we are witnessing a dramatic meeting of two cultures.
We are also seeing one of history’s great cultural revolutions.
We are about to step out of antiquity. Almost one thousand
years have passed since the days of the early Greek philosophers.
Ahead of us we have the Christian Middle Ages, which also lasted
for about a thousand years.
The German poet Goethe once said that “he who cannot draw
on three thousand years is living from hand to mouth.” I don’t want
you to end up in such a sad state. I will do what I can to acquaint
you with your historical roots. It is the only way to become a human
being. It is the only way to become more than a naked ape. It is the
only way to avoid floating in a vacuum.
“It is the only way to become a human being. It is the only way
to become more than a naked ape ...”
Sophie sat for a while staring into the garden through the little
holes in the hedge. She was beginning to understand why it was so
important to know about her historical roots. It had certainly been
important to the Children of Israel.
She herself was just an ordinary person. But if she knew her
historical roots, she would be a little less ordinary.
She would not be living on this planet for more than a few
years. But if the history of mankind was her own history, in a way
she was thousands of years old.
158
The Middle Ages
... going only part of the way is not the same
as going the wrong way…
A week passed without Sophie hearing from Alberto Knox. There
were no more postcards from Lebanon either, although she and
Joanna still talked about the cards they found in the major’s cabin.
Joanna had had the fright of her life, but as nothing further seemed
to happen, the immediate terror faded and was submerged in
homework and badminton.
Sophie read Alberto’s letters over and over, looking for some
clue that would throw light on the Hilde mystery. Doing so also gave
her plenty of opportunity to digest the classical philosophy. She no
longer had difficulty in distinguishing Democritus and Socrates, or
Plato and Aristotle, from each other.
On Friday, May 25, she was in the kitchen fixing dinner before
her mother got home. It was their regular Friday agreement. Today
she was making fish soup with fish balls and carrots. Plain and
simple.
Outside it was becoming windy. As Sophie stood stirring the
casserole she turned toward the window. The birch trees were
waving like cornstalks.
Suddenly something smacked against the window-pane.
Sophie turned around again and discovered a card sticking to the
window.
It was a postcard. She could read it through the glass: “Hilde
Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen.”
She thought as much! She opened the window and took the
card. It could hardly have blown all the way from Lebanon!
This card was also dated June 15. Sophie removed the casserole
from the stove and sat down at the kitchen table. The card read:
Dear Hilde, I don’t know whether it will still be your birthday
when you read this card. I hope so, in a way; or at least that not too 
159
many days have gone by. A week or two for Sophie does not have
to mean just as long for us. I shall be coming home for Midsummer
Eve, so we can sit together for hours in the glider, looking out over
the sea, Hilde. We have so much to talk about. Love from Dad, who
sometimes gets very depressed about the thousand-year-long strife
between Jews, Christians, and Muslims. I have to keep reminding
myself that all three religions stem from Abraham. So I suppose they
all pray to the same God. Down here, Cain and Abel have not
finished killing each other.
P.S. Please say hello to Sophie. Poor child, she still doesn’t
know how this whole thing hangs together. But perhaps you do?
Sophie put her head down on the table, exhausted. One thing
was certain—she had no idea how this thing hung together. But
Hilde did, presumably.
If Hilde’s father asked her to say hello to Sophie, it had to mean
that Hilde knew more about Sophie than Sophie did about Hilde. It
was all so complicated that Sophie went back to fixing dinner.
A postcard that smacked against the kitchen window all by
itself! You could call that airmail! As soon as she had set the
casserole on the stove again, the telephone rang.
Suppose it was Dad! She wished desperately that he would
come home so she could tell him everything that had happened in
these last weeks. But it was probably only Joanna or Mom. Sophie
snatched up the phone.
“Sophie Amundsen,” she said. “It’s me,” said a voice.
Sophie was sure of three things: it was not her father. But it was
a man’s voice, and a voice she knew she had heard before.
“Who is this?” “It’s Alberto.” “Ohhh!”
Sophie was at a loss for words. It was the voice from the
Acropolis video that she had recognized. “Are you all right?”
“Sure.”
“From now on there will be no more letters.” “But I didn’t send
you a frog!”
“We must meet in person. It’s beginning to be urgent, you see.”
“Why?”
“Hilde’s father is closing in on us.” “Closing in how?”
“On all sides, Sophie. We have to work together now.” 
160
“How...?”
“But you can’t help much before I have told you about the
Middle Ages. We ought to cover the Renaissance and the
seventeenth century as well. Berkeley is a key figure...”
“Wasn’t he the man in the picture at the major’s cabin?”
“That very same. Maybe the actual struggle will be waged over
his philosophy.” “You make it sound like a war.”
“I would rather call it a battle of wills. We have to attract
Hilde’s attention and get her over on our side before her father
comes home to Lillesand.”
“I don’t get it at all.”
“Perhaps the philosophers can open your eyes. Meet me at St.
Mary’s Church at eight o’clock tomorrow morning. But come alone,
my child.”
“So early in the morning?” The telephone clicked. “Hello?”
He had hung up! Sophie rushed back to the stove just before
the fish soup boiled over.
St. Mary’s Church? That was an old stone church from the
Middle Ages. It was only used for concerts and very special
ceremonies. And in the summer it was sometimes open to tourists.
But surely it wasn’t open in the middle of the night?
When her mother got home, Sophie had put the card from
Lebanon with everything else from Alberto and Hilde. After dinner
she went over to Joanna’s place.
“We have to make a very special arrangement,” she said as
soon as her friend opened the door. She said no more until Joanna
had closed her bedroom door.
“It’s rather problematic,” Sophie went on. “Spit it out!”
“I’m going to have to tell Mom that I’m staying the night here.”
“Great!”
“But it’s only something I’m saying, you see. I’ve got to go
somewhere else.” “That’s bad. Is it a guy?”
“No, it’s to do with Hilde.”
Joanna whistled softly, and Sophie looked her severely in the
eye.
“I’m coming over this evening,” she said, “but at seven o’clock
I’ve got to sneak out again.
161
You’ve got to cover for me until I get back.”
“But where are you going? What is it you have to do?” “Sorry.
My lips are sealed.”
Sleepovers were never a problem. On the contrary, almost.
Sometimes Sophie got the impression that her mother enjoyed
having the house to herself.
“You’ll be home for breakfast, I suppose?” was her mother’s
only remark as Sophie left the house. “If I’m not, you know where I
am.”
What on earth made her say that? It was the one weak spot.
Sophie’s visit began like any other sleepover, with talk until
late into the night. The only difference was that when they finally
settled down to sleep at about two o’clock, Sophie set the alarm
clock to a quarter to seven.
Five hours later, Joanna woke briefly as Sophie switched off
the buzzer. “Take care,” she mumbled.
Then Sophie was on her way. St. Mary’s Church lay on the
outskirts of the old part of town. It was several miles walk away, but
even though she had only slept for a few hours she felt wide awake.
It was almost eight o’clock when she stood at the entrance to
the old stone church. Sophie tried the massive door. It was unlocked!
Inside the church it was as deserted and silent as the church was
old. A bluish light filtered in through the stained-glass windows
revealing a myriad of tiny particles of dust hovering in the air. The
dust seemed to gather in thick beams this way and that inside the
church. Sophie sat on one of the benches in the center of the nave,
staring toward the altar at an old crucifix painted with muted colors.
Some minutes passed. Suddenly the organ began to play.
Sophie dared not look around. It sounded like an ancient hymn,
probably from the Middle Ages.
There was silence again. Then she heard footsteps approaching
from behind her. Should she look around? She chose instead to fix
her eyes on the Cross.
The footsteps passed her on their way up the aisle and she saw
a figure dressed in a brown monk’s habit. Sophie could have sworn
it was a monk right out of the Middle Ages.
She was nervous, but not scared out of her wits. In front of the 
162
altar the monk turned in a half- circle and then climbed up into the
pulpit. He leaned over the edge, looked down at Sophie, and
addressed her in Latin:
“Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto. Sicut erat in principio,
et nunc, et semper et in saecula saeculorum. Amen.”
“Talk sense, silly!” Sophie burst out.
Her voice resounded all around the old stone church.
Although she realized that the monk had to be Alberto Knox,
she regretted her outburst in this venerable place of worship. But she
had been nervous, and when you’re nervous its comforting to break
all taboos.
“Shhh!” Alberto held up one hand as priests do when they want
the congregation to be seated. “Middle Ages began at four,” he said.
“Middle Ages began at four?” asked Sophie, feeling stupid but
no longer nervous.
“About four o’clock, yes. And then it was five and six and
seven. But it was as if time stood still.
And it got to be eight and nine and ten. But it was still the
Middle Ages, you see. Time to get up to a new day, you may think.
Yes, I see what you mean. But it is still Sunday, one long endless
row of Sundays. And it got to be eleven and twelve and thirteen.
This was the period we call the High Gothic, when the great
cathedrals of Europe were built. And then, some time around
fourteen hours, at two in the afternoon, a cock crowed—and the
Middle Ages began to ebb away.”
“So the Middle Ages lasted for ten hours then,” said Sophie.
Alberto thrust his head forward out of the brown monk’s cowl and
surveyed his congregation, which consisted of a fourteen-year-old
girl.
“If each hour was a hundred years, yes. We can pretend that
Jesus was born at midnight. Paul began his missionary journeys just
before half past one in the morning and died in Rome a quarter of
an hour later. Around three in the morning the Christian church was
more or less banned, but by A.D. 313 it was an accepted religion in
the Roman Empire. That was in the reign of the Emperor
Constantine. The holy emperor himself was first baptized on his
deathbed many years later. From the year 380 Christianity was the 
163
official religion throughout the entire Roman Empire.”
“Didn’t the Roman Empire fall?”
“It was just beginning to crumble. We are standing before one
of the greatest changes in the history of culture. Rome in the fourth
century was being threatened both by barbarians pressing in from
the north and by disintegration from within. In A.D. 330 Constantine
the Great moved the capital of the Empire from Rome to
Constantinople, the city he had founded at the approach to the Black
Sea. Many people considered the new city the “second Rome.” In
395 the Roman Empire was divided in two—a Western Empire with
Rome as its center, and an Eastern Empire with the new city of
Constantinople as its capital. Rome was plundered by barbarians in
410, and in 476 the whole of the Western Empire was destroyed.
The Eastern Empire continued to exist as a state right up until 1453
when the Turks conquered Constantinople.”
“And its name got changed to Istanbul?”
“That’s right! Istanbul is its latest name. Another date we
should notice is 529. That was the year when the church closed
Plato’s Academy in Athens. In the same year, the Benedictine order,
the first of the great monastic orders, was founded. The year 529
thus became a symbol of the way the Christian Church put the lid
on Greek philosophy. From then on, monasteries had the monopoly
of education, reflection, and meditation. The clock was ticking
toward half past five ...”
Sophie saw what Alberto meant by all these times. Midnight
was 0, one o’clock was 100 years after Christ, six o’clock was 600
years after Christ, and 14 hours was 1,400 years after Christ...
Alberto continued: “The Middle Ages actually means the
period between two other epochs. The expression arose during the
Renaissance. The Dark Ages, as they were also called, were seen
then as one interminable thousand-year-long night which had settled
over Europe between antiquity and the Renaissance. The word
‘medieval’ is used negatively nowadays about anything that is overauthoritative and inflexible. But many historians now consider the
Middle Ages to have been a thousand-year period of germination
and growth. The school system, for instance, was developed in the
Middle Ages. The first convent schools were opened quite early on 
164
in the period, and cathedral schools followed in the twelfth century.
Around the year 1200 the first universities were founded, and the
subjects to be studied were grouped into various ‘faculties,’ just as
they are today.”
“A thousand years is a really long time.”
“Yes, but Christianity took time to reach the masses. Moreover,
in the course of the Middle Ages the various nation-states
established themselves, with cities and citizens, folk music and
folktales. What would fairy tales and folk songs have been without
the Middle Ages? What would Europe have been, even? A Roman
province, perhaps. Yet the resonance in such names as England,
France, or Germany is the very same boundless deep we call the
Middle Ages. There are many shining fish swimming around in
those depths, although we do not always catch sight of them. Snorri
lived in the Middle Ages. So did Saint Olaf and Charlemagne, to say
nothing of Romeo and Juliet, Joan of Arc, Ivanhoe, the Pied Piper
of Hamelin, and many mighty princes and majestic kings, chivalrous
knights and fair damsels, anonymous stained-glass window makers
and ingenious organ builders. And I haven’t even mentioned friars,
crusaders, or witches.”
“You haven’t mentioned the clergy, either.”
“Correct. Christianity didn’t come to Norway, by the way, until
the eleventh century. It would be an exaggeration to say that the
Nordic countries converted to Christianity at one fell swoop.
Ancient heathen beliefs persisted under the surface of Christianity,
and many of these pre-Christian elements became integrated with
Christianity. In Scandinavian Christmas celebrations, for example,
Christian and Old Norse customs are wedded even to this day. And
here the old saying applies, that married folk grow to resemble each
other. Yuletide cookies, Yuletide piglets, and Yuletide ale begin to
resemble the Three Wise Men from the Orient and the manger in
Bethlehem. But without doubt, Christianity gradually became the
predominant philosophy of life. Therefore we usually speak of the
Middle Ages as being a unifying force of Christian culture.”
“So it wasn’t all gloom, then?”
“The first centuries after the year 400 really were a cultural
decline. The Roman period had been a high culture, with big cities 
165
that had sewers, public baths, and libraries, not to mention proud
architecture. In the early centuries of the Middle Ages this entire
culture crumbled. So did its trade and economy. In the Middle Ages
people returned to payment in kind and bartering. The economy was
now characterized by feudalism, which meant that a few powerful
nobles owned the land, which the serfs had to toil on in order to live.
The population also declined steeply in the first centuries. Rome had
over a million inhabitants in antiquity. But by 600, the population of
the old Roman capital had fallen to 40,000, a mere fraction of what
it had been. Thus a relatively small population was left to wander
among what remained of the majestic edifices of the city’s former
glory. When they needed building materials, there were plenty of
ruins to supply them. This is naturally a source of great sorrow to
present-day archeologists, who would rather have seen medieval
man leave the ancient monuments untouched.”
“It’s easy to know better after the fact.”
“From a political point of view, the Roman period was already
over by the end of the fourth century. However, the Bishop of Rome
became the supreme head of the Roman Catholic Church. He was
given the title ‘Pope’—in Latin ‘papa,’ which means what it says—
and gradually became looked upon as Christ’s deputy on earth.
Rome was thus the Christian capital throughout most of the
medieval period. But as the kings and bishops of the new nationstates became more and more powerful, some of them were bold
enough to stand up to the might of the church.”
“You said the church closed Plato’s Academy in Athens. Does
that mean that all the Greek philosophers were forgotten?”
“Not entirely. Some of the writings of Aristotle and Plato were
known. But the old Roman Empire was gradually divided into three
different cultures. In Western Europe we had a Latinized Christian
culture with Rome as its capital. In Eastern Europe we had a Greek
Christian culture with Constantinople as its capital. This city began
to be called by its Greek name, Byzantium. We therefore speak of
the Byzantine Middle Ages as opposed to the Roman Catholic
Middle Ages. However, North Africa and the Middle East had also
been part of the Roman Empire. This area developed during the
Middle Ages into an Arabic-speaking Muslim culture. After the 
166
death of Muhammad in 632, both the Middle East and North Africa
were won over to Islam. Shortly thereafter, Spain also became part
of the world of Islamic culture. Islam adopted Mecca, Medina,
Jerusalem, and Bagdad as holy cities. From the point of view of
cultural history, it is interesting to note that the Arabs also took over
the ancient Hellenistic city of Alexandria. Thus much of the old
Greek science was inherited by the Arabs. All through the Middle
Ages, the Arabs were predominant hi sciences such as mathematics,
chemistry, astronomy, and medicine. Nowadays we still use Arabic
figures. In a number of areas Arabic culture was superior to
Christian culture.”
“I wanted to know what happened to Greek philosophy.”
“Can you imagine a broad river that divides for a while into
three different streams before it once again becomes one great wide
river?”
“Yes.”
“Then you can also see how the Greco-Roman culture was
divided, but survived through the three cultures: the Roman Catholic
in the west, the Byzantine in the east, and the Arabic in the south.
Although it’s greatly oversimplified, we could say that
Neoplatonism was handed down in the west, Plato in the east, and
Aristotle to the Arabs in the south. But there was also something of
them all in all three streams. The point is that at the end of the Middle
Ages, all three streams came together in Northern Italy. The Arabic
influence came from the Arabs in Spain, the Greek influence from
Greece and the Byzantine Empire. And now we see the beginning
of the Renaissance, the ‘rebirth’ of antique culture. In one sense,
antique culture had survived the Dark Ages.” “I see.”
“But let us not anticipate the course of events. We mast first
talk a little about medieval philosophy. I shall not speak from this
pulpit any more. I’m coming down.”
Sophie’s eyes were heavy from too little sleep. When she saw
the strange monk descending from the pulpit of St. Mary’s Church,
she felt as if she were dreaming.
Alberto walked toward the altar rail. He looked up at the altar
with its ancient crucifix, then he walked slowly toward Sophie. He
sat down beside her on the bench of the pew.
167
It was a strange feeling, being so close to him. Under his cowl
Sophie saw a pair of deep brown eyes. They belonged to a middleaged man with dark hair and a little pointed beard. Who are you, she
wondered. Why have you turned my life upside down?
“We shall become better acquainted by and by,” he said, as if
he had read her thoughts.
As they sat there together, with the light that filtered into the
church through the stained-glass windows becoming sharper and
sharper, Alberto Knox began to talk about medieval philosophy.
“The medieval philosophers took it almost for granted that
Christianity was true,” he began. “The question was whether we
must simply believe the Christian revelation or whether we can
approach the Christian truths with the help of reason. What was the
relationship between the Greek philosophers and what the Bible
said? Was there a contradiction between the Bible and reason, or
were belief and knowledge compatible? Almost all medieval
philosophy centered on this one question.”
Sophie nodded impatiently. She had been through this in her
religion class.
“We shall see how the two most prominent medieval
philosophers dealt with this question, and we might as well begin
with St. Augustine, who lived from 354 to 430. In this one person’s
life we can observe the actual transition from late antiquity to the
Early Middle Ages. Augustine was born in the little town of Tagaste
in North Africa. At the age of sixteen he went to Carthage to study.
Later he traveled to Rome and Milan, and lived the last years of his
life in the town of Hippo, a few miles west of Carthage. However,
he was not a Christian all his life. Augustine examined several
different religions and philosophies before he became a Christian.”
“Could you give some examples?”
“For a time he was a Manichaean. The Manichaeans were a
religious sect that was extremely characteristic of late antiquity.
Their doctrine was half religion and half philosophy, asserting that
the world consisted of a dualism of good and evil, light and
darkness, spirit and matter. With his spirit, mankind could rise above
the world of matter and thus prepare for the salvation of his soul.
But this sharp division between good and evil gave the young 
168
Augustine no peace of mind. He was completely preoccupied with
what we like to call the ‘problem of evil.’ By this we mean the
question of where evil comes from. For a time he was influenced by
Stoic philosophy, and according to the Stoics, there was no sharp
division between good and evil. However, his principal leanings
were toward the other significant philosophy of late antiquity,
Neoplatonism. Here he came across the idea that all existence is
divine in nature.”
“So he became a Neoplatonic bishop?”
“Yes, you could say that. He became a Christian first, but the
Christianity of St. Augustine is largely influenced by Platonic ideas.
And therefore, Sophie, therefore you have to understand that there
is no dramatic break with Greek philosophy the minute we enter the
Christian Middle Ages. Much of Greek philosophy was carried over
to the new age through Fathers of the Church like St. Augustine.”
“Do you mean that St. Augustine was half Christian and half
Neoplatonist?”
“He himself believed he was a hundred-percent Christian
although he saw no real contradiction between Christianity and the
philosophy of Plato. For him, the similarity between Plato and the
Christian doctrine was so apparent that he thought Plato must have
had knowledge of the Old Testament. This, of course, is highly
improbable. Let us rather say that it was St. Augustine who
‘christianized’ Plato.”
“So he didn’t turn his back on everything that had to do with
philosophy when he started believing in Christianity?”
“No, but he pointed out that there are limits to how far reason
can get you in religious questions.
Christianity is a divine mystery that we can only perceive
through faith. But if we believe in Christianity, God will ‘illuminate’
the soul so that we experience a sort of supernatural knowledge of
God. St. Augustine had felt within himself that there was a limit to
how far philosophy could go. Not before he became a Christian did
he find peace in his own soul. ‘Our heart is not quiet until it rests in
Thee,’ he writes.”
“I don’t quite understand how Plato’s ideas could go together
with Christianity,” Sophie objected. “What about the eternal ideas?”
169
“Well, St. Augustine certainly maintains that God created the
world out of the void, and that was a Biblical idea. The Greeks
preferred the idea that the world had always existed. But St.
Augustine believed that before God created the world, the ‘ideas’
were in the Divine mind. So he located the Platonic ideas in God
and in that way preserved the Platonic view of eternal ideas.”
“That was smart.”
“But it indicates how not only St. Augustine but many of the
other Church Fathers bent over backward to bring Greek and Jewish
thought together. In a sense they were of two cultures. Augustine
also inclined to Neoplatonism in his view of evil. He believed, like
Plotinus, that evil is the ‘absence of God.’ Evil has no independent
existence, it is something that is not, for God’s creation is in fact
only good. Evil comes from mankind’s disobedience, Augustine
believed. Or, in his own words, ‘The good will is God’s work; the
evil will is the falling away from God’s work.’ “
“Did he also believe that man has a divine soul?”
“Yes and no. St. Augustine maintained that there is an
insurmountable barrier between God and the world. In this he stands
firmly on Biblical ground, rejecting the doctrine of Plotinus that
everything is one. But he nevertheless emphasizes that man is a
spiritual being. He has a material body—which belongs to the
physical world which ‘moth and rust doth corrupt’—but he also has
a soul which can know God.”
“What happens to the soul when we die?”
“According to St. Augustine, the entire human race was lost
after the Fall of Man. But God nevertheless decided that certain
people should be saved from perdition.”
“In that case, God could just as well have decided that
everybody should be saved.”
“As far as that goes, St. Augustine denied that man has any
right to criticize God, referring to Paul’s Epistle to the Romans: ‘O
Man, who art thou that replies! against God? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it; why hast thou made me thus? or Hath not
the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honor and another unto dishonor?’ “
170
“So God sits up in his Heaven playing with people? And as
soon as he is dissatisfied with one of his creations, he just throws it
away.”
“St. Augustine’s point was that no man deserves God’s
redemption. And yet God has chosen some to be saved from
damnation, so for him there was nothing secret about who will be
saved and who damned. It is preordained. We are entirely at his
mercy.”
“So in a way, he returned to the old belief in fate.”
“Perhaps. But St. Augustine did not renounce man’s
responsibility for his own life. He taught that we must live in
awareness of being among the chosen. He did not deny that we have
free will. But God has ‘foreseen’ how we will live.”
“Isn’t that rather unfair?” asked Sophie. “Socrates said that we
all had the same chances because we all had the same common
sense. But St. Augustine divides people into two groups. One group
gets saved and the other gets damned.”
“You are right in that St. Augustine’s theology is considerably
removed from the humanism of Athens. But St. Augustine wasn’t
dividing humanity into two groups. He was merely expounding the
Biblical doctrine of salvation and damnation. He explained this in a
learned work called the City of God.”
“Tell me about that.”
“The expression ‘City of God,’ or ‘Kingdom of God,’ comes
from the Bible and the teachings of Jesus. St. Augustine believed
that all human history is a struggle between the ‘Kingdom of God’
and the ‘Kingdom of the World.’ The two ‘kingdoms’ are not
political kingdoms distinct from each other. They struggle for
mastery inside every single person. Nevertheless, the Kingdom of
God is more or less clearly present in the Church, and the Kingdom
of the World is present in the State—for example, in the Roman
Empire, which was in decline at the time of St. Augustine. This
conception became increasingly clear as Church and State fought
for supremacy throughout the Middle Ages. There is no salvation
outside the Church,’ it was now said. St. Augustine’s ‘City of God’
eventually became identical with the established Church. Not until
the Reformation in the sixteenth century was there any protest 
171
against the idea that people could only obtain salvation through the
Church.”
“It was about time!”
“We can also observe that St. Augustine was the first
philosopher we have come across to draw history into his
philosophy. The struggle between good and evil was by no means
new. What was new was that for Augustine the struggle was played
out in history. There is not much of Plato in this aspect of St.
Augustine’s work. He was more influenced by the linear view of
history as we meet it in the Old Testament: the idea that God needs
all of history in order to realize his Kingdom of God. History is
necessary for the enlightenment of man and the destruction of evil.
Or, as St. Augustine put it, ‘Divine foresight directs the history of
mankind from Adam to the end of time as if it were the story of one
man who gradually develops from childhood to old age.’ “
Sophie looked at her watch. “It’s ten o’clock,” she said. “I’ll
have to go soon.”
“But first I must tell you about the other great medieval
philosopher. Shall we sit outside?”
Alberto stood up. He placed the palms of his hands together
and began to stride down the aisle. He looked as if he was praying
or meditating deeply on some spiritual truth. Sophie followed him;
she felt she had no choice.
The sun had not yet broken through the morning clouds.
Alberto seated himself on a bench outside the church. Sophie
wondered what people would think if anyone came by. Sitting on a
church bench at ten in the morning was odd in itself, and sitting with
a medieval monk wouldn’t make things look any better.
“It is eight o’clock,” he began. “About four hundred years have
elapsed since St. Augustine, and now school starts. From now until
ten o’clock, convent schools will have the monopoly on education.
Between ten and eleven o’clock the first cathedral schools will be
founded, followed at noon by the first universities. The great Gothic
cathedrals will be built at the same time. This church, too, dates from
the 1200s—or what we call the High Gothic period. In this town
they couldn’t afford a large cathedral.”
“They didn’t need one,” Sophie said. “I hate empty churches.”
172
“Ah, but the great cathedrals were not built only for large
congregations. They were built to the glory of God and were in
themselves a kind of religious celebration. However, something
else happened during this period which has special significance for
philosophers like us.”
Alberto continued: “The influence of the Arabs of Spain began
to make itself felt. Throughout the Middle Ages, the Arabs had kept
the Aristotelian tradition alive, and from the end of the twelfth
century, Arab scholars began to arrive in Northern Italy at the
invitation of the nobles. Many of Aristotle’s writings thus became
known and were translated from Greek and Arabic into Latin. This
created a new interest in the natural sciences and infused new life
into the question of the Christian revelation’s relationship to Greek
philosophy. Aristotle could obviously no longer be ignored in
matters of science, but when should one attend to Aristotle the
philosopher, and when should one stick to the Bible? Do you see?”
Sophie nodded, and the monk went on:
“The greatest and most significant philosopher of this period
was St. Thomas Aquinas, who lived from 1225 to 1274. He came
from the little town of Aquino, between Rome and Naples, but he
also worked as a teacher at the University of Paris. I call him a
philosopher but he was just as much a theologian. There was no
great difference between philosophy and theology at that time.
Briefly, we can say that Aquinas Christianized Aristotle in the same
way that St. Augustine Christianized Plato in early medieval times.”
“Wasn’t it rather an odd thing to do, Christianizing
philosophers who had lived several hundred years before Christ?”
“You could say so. But by ‘Christianizing’ these two great
Greek philosophers, we only mean that they were interpreted and
explained in such a way that they were no longer considered a threat
to Christian dogma. Aquinas was among those who tried to make
Aristotle’s philosophy compatible with Christianity. We say that he
created the great synthesis between faith and knowledge. He did this
by entering the philosophy of Aristotle and taking him at his word.”
“I’m sorry, but I had hardly any sleep last night. I’m afraid
you’ll have to explain it more clearly.” “Aquinas believed that there
need be no conflict between what philosophy or reason teaches us 
173
and what the Christian Revelation or faith teaches us. Christendom
and philosophy often say the same thing. So we can frequently
reason ourselves to the same truths that we can read in the Bible.”
“How come? Can reason tell us that God created the world in
six days or that Jesus was the Son of God?”
“No, those so-called verities of faith are only accessible
through belief and the Christian Revelation. But Aquinas believed
in the existence of a number of ‘natural theological truths.’ By that
he meant truths that could be reached both through Christian faith
and through our innate or natural reason. For example, the truth that
there is a God. Aquinas believed that there are two paths to God.
One path goes through faith and the Christian Revelation, and the
other goes through reason and the senses. Of these two, the path of
faith and revelation is certainly the surest, because it is easy to lose
one’s way by trusting to reason alone. But Aquinas’s point was that
there need not be any conflict between a philosopher like Aristotle
and the Christian doctrine.”
“So we can take our choice between believing Aristotle and
believing the Bible?”
“Not at all. Aristotle goes only part of the way because he
didn’t know of the Christian revelation. But going only part of the
way is not the same as going the wrong way. For example, it is not
wrong to say that Athens is in Europe. But neither is it particularly
precise. If a book only tells you that Athens is a city in Europe, it
would be wise to look it up in a geography book as well. There you
would find the whole truth that Athens is the capital of Greece, a
small country in southeastern Europe. If you are lucky you might be
told a little about the Acropolis as well. Not to mention Socrates,
Plato, and Aristotle.”
“But the first bit of information about Athens was true.”
“Exactly! Aquinas wanted to prove that there is only one truth.
So when Aristotle shows us something our reason tells us is true, it
is not in conflict with Christian teaching. We can arrive successfully
at one aspect of the truth with the aid of reason and the evidence of
our senses. For example, the kind of truths Aristotle refers to when
he describes the plant and the animal kingdom. Another aspect of
the truth is revealed to us by God through the Bible. But the two 
174
aspects of the truth overlap at significant points. There are many
questions about which the Bible and reason tell us exactly the same
thing.”
“Like there being a God?”
“Exactly. Aristotle’s philosophy also presumed the existence
of a God—or a formal cause—which sets all natural processes
going. But he gives no further description of God. For this we must
rely solely on the Bible and the teachings of Jesus.”
“Is it so absolutely certain that there is a God?”
“It can be disputed, obviously. But even in our day most people
will agree that human reason is certainly not capable of disproving
the existence of God. Aquinas went further. He believed that he
could prove God’s existence on the basis of Aristotle’s philosophy.”
“Not bad!”
“With our reason we can recognize that everything around us
must have a ‘formal cause,’ he believed. God has revealed himself
to mankind both through the Bible and through reason. There is thus
both a ‘theology of faith’ and a ‘natural theology.’ The same is true
of the moral aspect. The Bible teaches us how God wants us to live.
But God has also given us a conscience which enables us to
distinguish between right and wrong on a ‘natural’ basis. There are
thus also ‘two paths’ to a moral life. We know that it is wrong to
harm people even if we haven’t read in the Bible that we must ‘do
unto others as you would have them do unto you.’ Here, too, the
surest guide is to follow the Bible’s commandment.”
“I think I understand,” said Sophie now. “It’s almost like how
we know there’s a thunderstorm, by seeing the lightning and by
hearing the thunder.”
“That’s right! We can hear the thunder even if we are blind, and
we can see the lightning even if we are deaf. It’s best if we can both
see and hear, of course. But there is no contradiction between what
we see and what we hear. On the contrary—the two impressions
reinforce each other.”
“I see.”
“Let me add another picture. If you read a novel— John
Steinbeck’s Of Mice and Men, for example ...”
“I’ve read that, actually.”
175
“Don’t you feel you know something about the author just by
reading his book?” “I realize there is a person who wrote it.”
“Is that all you know about him?” “He seems to care about
outsiders.”
“When you read this book—which is Steinbeck’s creation—
you get to know something about Steinbeck’s nature as well. But
you cannot expect to get any personal information about the author.
Could you tell from reading Of Mice and Men how old the author
was when he wrote it, where he lived, or how many children he
had?”
“Of course not.”
“But you can find this information in a biography of John
Steinbeck. Only in a biography—or an autobiography—can you get
better acquainted with Steinbeck, the person.”
“That’s true.”
“That’s more or less how it is with God’s Creation and the
Bible. We can recognize that there is a God just by walking around
in the natural world. We can easily see that He loves flowers and
animals, otherwise He would not have made them. But information
about God, the person, is only found in the Bible—or in God’s
‘autobiography,’ if you like.”
“You’re good at finding examples.” “Mmmm...”
For the first time Alberto just sat there thinking—without
answering.
“Does all this have anything to do with Hilde?” Sophie could
not help asking. “We don’t know whether there is a ‘Hilde’ at all.”
“But we know someone is planting evidence of her all over the
place. Postcards, a silk scarf, a green wallet, a stocking ...”
Alberto nodded. “And it seems as if it is Hilde’s father who is
deciding how many clues he will plant,” he said. “For now, all we
know is that someone is sending us a lot of postcards. I wish he
would write something about himself too. But we shall return to that
later.”
“It’s a quarter to eleven. I’ll have to get home before the end of
the Middle Ages.”
“I shall just conclude with a few words about how Aquinas
adopted Aristotle’s philosophy in all the areas where it did not 
176
collide with the Church’s theology. These included his logic, his
theory of knowledge, and not least his natural philosophy. Do you
recall, for example, how Aristotle described the progressive scale of
life from plants and animals to humans?”
Sophie nodded.
“Aristotle believed that this scale indicated a God that
constituted a sort of maximum of existence.
This scheme of things was not difficult to align with Christian
theology. According to Aquinas, there was a progressive degree of
existence from plants and animals to man, from man to angels, and
from angels to God. Man, like animals, has a body and sensory
organs, but man also has intelligence which enables him to reason
things out.
Angels have no such body with sensory organs, which is why
they have spontaneous and immediate intelligence. They have no
need to ‘ponder,’ like humans; they have no need to reason out
conclusions. They know everything that man can know without
having to learn it step by step like us.
And since angels have no body, they can never die. They are
not everlasting like God, because they were once created by God.
But they have no body that they must one day depart from, and so
they will never die.”
“That sounds lovely!”
“But up above the angels, God rules, Sophie. He can see and
know everything in one single coherent vision.”
“So he can see us now.”
“Yes, perhaps he can. But not ‘now.’ For God, time does not
exist as it does for us. Our ‘now’ is not God’s ‘now.’ Because many
weeks pass for us, they do not necessarily pass for God.”
“That’s creepy!” Sophie exclaimed. She put her hand over her
mouth. Alberto looked down at her, and Sophie continued: “I got
another card from Hilde’s father yesterday. He wrote something
like— even if it takes a week or two for Sophie, that doesn’t have to
mean it will be that long for us. That’s almost the same as what you
said about God!”
Sophie could see a sudden frown flash across Alberto’s face
beneath the brown cowl. “He ought to be ashamed of himself!”
177
Sophie didn’t quite understand what Alberto meant. He went
on: “Unfortunately, Aquinas also adopted Aristotle’s view of
women. You may perhaps recall that Aristotle thought a woman was
more or less an incomplete man. He also thought that children only
inherit the father’s characteristics, since a woman was passive and
receptive while the man was active and creative. According to
Aquinas, these views harmonized with the message of the Bible—
which, for example, tells us that woman was made out of Adam’s
rib.”
“Nonsense!”
“It’s interesting to note that the eggs of mammals were not
discovered until 1827. It was therefore perhaps not so surprising that
people thought it was the man who was the creative and lifegiving
force in reproduction. We can moreover note that, according to
Aquinas, it is only as nature-being that woman is inferior to man.
Woman’s soul is equal to man’s soul. In Heaven there is complete
equality of the sexes because all physical gender differences cease
to exist.”
“That’s cold comfort. Weren’t there any women philosophers
in the Middle Ages?”
“The life of the church in the Middle Ages was heavily
dominated by men. But that did not mean that there were no women
thinkers. One of them was Hildegard of Bingen...”
Sophie’s eyes widened:
“Does she have anything to do with Hilde?”
“What a question! Hildegard lived as a nun in the Rhine Valley
from 1098 to 1179. In spite of being a woman, she worked as
preacher, author, physician, botanist, and naturalist. She is an
example of the fact that women were often more practical, more
scientific even, in the Middle Ages.”
“But what about Hilde?”
“It was an ancient Christian and Jewish belief that God was not
only a man. He also had a female side, or ‘mother nature.’ Women,
too, are created in God’s likeness. In Greek, this female side of God
is called Sophia. ‘Sophia’ or ‘Sophie’ means wisdom.”
Sophie shook her head resignedly. Why had nobody ever told
her that? And why had she never asked?
178
Alberto continued: “Sophia, or God’s mother nature, had a
certain significance both for Jews and in the Greek Orthodox Church
throughout the Middle Ages. In the west she was forgotten. But
along comes Hildegard. Sophia appeared to her in a vision, dressed
in a golden tunic adorned with costly jewels ...”
Sophie stood up. Sophia had revealed herself to Hildegard in a
vision ... “Maybe I will appear to Hilde.”
She sat down again. For the third time Alberto laid his hand on
her shoulder.
“That is something we must look into. But now it is past eleven
o’clock. You must go home, and we are approaching a new era. I
shall summon you to a meeting on the Renaissance. Hermes will
come get you in the garden.”
With that the strange monk rose and began to walk toward the
church. Sophie stayed where she was, thinking about Hildegard and
Sophia, Hilde and Sophie. Suddenly she jumped up and ran after the
monk-robed philosopher, calling:
“Was there also an Alberto in the Middle Ages?”
Alberto slowed his pace somewhat, turned his head slightly and
said, “Aquinas had a famous philosophy teacher called Albert the
Great...”
With that he bowed his head and disappeared through the door
of St. Mary’s Church.
Sophie was not satisfied with his answer. She followed him into
the church. But now it was completely empty. Did he go through the
floor?
Just as she was leaving the church she noticed a picture of the
Madonna. She went up to it and studied it closely. Suddenly she
discovered a little drop of water under one of the Madonna’s eyes.
Was it a tear?
Sophie rushed out of the church and hurried back to Joanna’s.
